IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(CIVIL REVISIONAL JURISDICTION)

Present:
  Mr Justice Abdur Rahman

Civil Revision No. 2098 of 2007

In the matter of

Md. Rowshan Ali Mia

        ... Plaintiff-Appellant
Petitioner
-Versus-
The Government of Bangladesh, represented by
the Deputy Commissioner, Chuadanga
 ... Defendant/Respondent
Opposite party

 Mr Shasti Sarkar Islam, Counsel
                                       ........For the petitioner

Mr Md. Zahirul Islam, Deputy Attorney
General with
Mr Md. Ferdous Sarker, Assistant
Attorney General.

...for the opposite party.

Date of Hearing: 29.6.2026 A.D.

 Date of Judgment: 30.06.2026 A.D., Tuesday,

16 Ashar, 1433 B.S.

             JUDGMENT:

Abdur Rahman, J:
This Rule was issued at the instance of the petitioner
under the authority of Section 115(1) of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, in the following terms:
“Let a Rule be issued calling upon the opposite party
to show cause as to why the impugned judgment
and decree dated 01.02.2007 (decree signed on
07.02.2007) passed by the learned District Judge,
Chuadanga in Title Appeal No. 10 of 2006 reversing
the judgment and decree dated 9.12.2005 and
decree singed on 18.9.2005 passed by the learned
Joint District Judge, First Court, Chuadanga in Title
Suit No. 92 of 2004 dismissing [Sic] the suit should
not be set aside and/or such other or further order
or orders as to this Court may seem fit and proper."

At the same time, this Court was also pleased to
direct the parties to maintain status quo in respect of

position and possession of the suit property till disposal of
the Rule.

 The crux of the facts of the case is that the
petitioner, as plaintiff, instituted Title Suit No. 92 of 2004
in the Court of Joint District Judge, First Court, Chuadanga,
for declaration of title, and the present R.S. Record is
wrong. The specific case of the plaintiff was that Rokman
and others were the C.S. recorded tenants. Among the
tenants, there was an amicable settlement, and Lal Chad
Biswas got a four annas share in respect of the disputed
plot; land being Plot No.5745, 5746 and 4061 and other
undisputed lands and got Sahams. Lal Chad Biswas died
leaving behind two sons, Abdul Karim and Jonab Ali, and
daughters Hasina and Robeya. The heirs of Lal Chad used
to possess the land as their father, and during S.A.
Operation their land was recorded in S.A. Khatian No. 203.
They used to possess the land, and due to their need for
cash money, they sold the same to Ershad Ali on 27.1.65
by registered deed No. 9569. Subsequently, Ershad owned

and possessed the land and sold it to Moniruddin on
26.5.65 by registered Deed No.4602. Moniruddin Sk died
leaving behind two sons, namely Bazlur Rahman and
Fazlur Rahman. The heirs of Moniruddin used to possess
the lands peacefully when a conflict arose between the
heirs of Moniruddin and the heirs of Ershad, then the
heirs of Ershad executed and registered a rectified deed
on 25.1.94 being No.750. Subsequently, the heirs of
Moniruddin sold the said land to the plaintiff by registered
deed being No.2764 dated 22.4.99. After purchasing the
land, the plaintiff has been in possession of the land. Due
to lack of knowledge, the plaintiff did not see the R.S.
Record. Subsequently, he came to know that the R.S. &
B.S. records had been wrongly recorded in the name of
the Government; hence, he filed this suit

The defendant No.1 contested the suit by filing a
written statement denying all the material allegations
against him and contending, inter alia, that the suit land
belongs to the Government and the Govt. has been

possessing the suit land; the R.S. record is correctly
recorded in the name of the Government. The plaintiff has
no right, title, interest and possession in the suit land. The
plaintiff has filed this suit to grab the lands of the
Government. Hence, the defendant prayed for dismissal
of the suit.

Thereafter, the trial court, after completing all legal
formalities, passed the impugned judgment and decree
dated 12.9.2005 (decree drawn up thereunder and signed
on 18.9.2005) decreeing the suit.

Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said
judgment, the defendant No.1 preferred an Appeal being
No. 10 of 2006 before the learned District Judge,
Chuadanga. After hearing both parties, the learned
District Judge was pleased to allow the appeal, reversing
the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial Court
vide its judgment and decree dated 01.02.2007 (decree
signed on 07.02.2007). Thereafter, the instant petitioner,

being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment of
the appellate Court, invoked this revisional jurisdiction.

Mr Shasti Sarkar, the learned Counsel appearing on
behalf of the petitioner, submitted that the appellate
Court has committed an error of law in not holding that
the plaintiff has been able to prove their case by adducing
evidence by both oral and documentary. It is the settled
principle of law that a record of right is not a document of
title. There is no basis of recording in the name of the
Government, so the Government has no title in the suit
land, but the Appellate Court did not consider this, which
has caused a failure of justice.
Learned Counsel has further submitted that the
Appellate Court has committed an error of law in not
holding that the heirs of Chad Ali sold their land on
27.1.65
by
registered
deed
being
No.7569,
and
subsequently Ershad sold to Moniruddin on 26.5.65 by
Registered deed being No.4602. There was an accidental
mistake in writing Plot No.5745 and 5746 in the deed, but

the same was written as 4745 and 4746, which is wrong.
Subsequently, the heirs of Ershad executed and registered
on 25.1.94 by Deed No.750. The heirs of Moniruddin have
sold '31 acres of land on 4.9.1999 by registered Deed
No.2764 to the plaintiff. After purchasing the land, the
plaintiffs have been possessing the land with the
knowledge of all people. The plaintiffs have been able to
prove their title as well as documents; But the appellate
court did not consider this, which has caused a failure of
justice.
Learned Counsel has further submitted that the
appellate court has committed an error of law in not
holding that P.W.1-Rawshan Ali has said in his cross
examination-in-Chief that- “এরশাদ িকভােব ‡c‡q weµx K‡i তাহা
জািন না। পের বেল এরশাদ তফিসল বিণত জিম খিরদ কের ‡c‡q‡Q । জরায়
বেলেছ উের আবু সাইদ, `wÿ‡b  আজগর আলী, পূেব বুবই ‡mL এবং প%&েম
হাজারী সখ। P.W.2 has said that, bvwjkx স'ি বাদীরা দখল কের।
From the above view of the facts that the plaintiff's are in

possession of the suit land but the appellate Court did not
consider so which has caused a failure of justice.
Learned Counsel has further submitted that the
learned District Judge, Chuadanga, has failed to consider
the facts and misread, misinterpret, misappraise,
discontinue, and non-consideration of evidence on record
and thereby erroneously dismissed the suit.
Learned Counsel has earnestly submitted that the
appellate Court has passed the Judgment without
considering the properly exhibited documents, which have
been exhibited without objection; as such, the documents
(Exhibited) should be accepted as genuine, but the
appellate court did not consider this, which has caused a
failure of justice.
Learned counsel further supporting the decisions of
the learned trial court referred to a decision as contained
in 50 DLR (1998)134 in respect of rectification of a sale
deed does not extinguish the title to the property and

another decision as contained in 32 DLR (1980) 252 in
respect of Kabala executed and registered in Bangladesh
in 1975.

Conversely, Mr Md. Zahirul Islam, Deputy Attorney
General, assisted by Mr Md. Ferdous Sarkar, Assistant
Attorney General, respectively posited that the learned
trial Court misconceived the facts, decreeing the suit, and
thereby the learned Appellate Court rightly reversed the
same, giving specific reasons and observations in its
judgment, which does not require interference.
Learned Deputy Attorney General further submitted
that the plaintiff, during trial, failed to establish any saham
between the heirs of C.S tenant and the plaintiff, who
purchased the suit land from the content of the wrong
record, where the title has not been prescribed to the
plaintiff.
Learned Deputy Attorney General submits that the
suit was seriously defective in its entirety; the plaintiff

filed the suit providing a false cause of action, and thereby
the Rule is liable to be discharged.
In view of the foregoing submissions, the learned
Counsel prayed for discharge of the Rule.
I have given my anxious and careful consideration to
the revisional application, the Rule issued thereupon, the
impugned judgments and decrees passed by both the
Courts below, the pleadings of the respective parties, the
oral and documentary evidence adduced before the trial
Court, the exhibits brought on record, the Subordinate
Court's Records (SCR), together with the decisions cited at
the Bar.
I have also attentively considered the elaborate
submissions advanced by the learned Counsel appearing
on behalf of the petitioner as well as the learned Deputy
Attorney General representing the opposite parties. Upon
an independent scrutiny of the entire record, viewed in
the light of the applicable principles of law governing

appreciation of evidence and the scope of revisional
jurisdiction under section 115(1) of the Code of Civil
Procedure, I now proceed to examine whether the
learned Appellate Court committed any error of law
resulting in an erroneous decision occasioning failure of
justice.
A close examination of the judgment and decree
rendered by the learned trial Court reveals that the
learned Judge meticulously evaluated both the oral and
documentary evidence available on record and arrived at
his findings after assigning cogent and convincing reasons.
The learned trial Court, while appreciating the evidentiary
value of the documents and depositions, observed as
follows:
“ বাদীপ( তাহােদর কিথত মেত িস.এস. ও এস.এ. পচা এবং তাহােদর
দািবকৃত র%জি-কৃত মূল দিললসমূহ দািখল কিরয়ােছন। বাদীপে(র
দািখলকৃত দিললসমূেহর মেধ/ ৩০ বৎসেরর পুরাতন দিললও রিহয়ােছ।
নািলশী খিতয়ােনর অপর কােনা শিরক নািলশী জিম দািব কের নাই।
(চলমান পাতা নং-৪) নািলশী খিতয়ােনর মািলক কােনা িহ5ু িছল না;

সুতরাং ইহাও ধারণা করার সুেযাগ নাই য, িহ5ু ব/%7গণ এেদশ ছািড়য়া
ভারেত যাওয়ার কারেণ নািলশী জিম পিরত/7 বা অিপত স'ি
হইয়ােছ। সরকার িববাদীর ব7ব/ য নািলশী জিম সরকাির খাস জিম।
সরকােরর নােম িকভােব খাস হইল, ইহার কােনা যথাথ ব/াখ/া সরকার
িববাদীর জবােব বা িববাদীপে(র সা(ী িড.ডি:উ.-১, ভূিম সহকারী
কমকতা মাঃ জবলুল রহমােনর জবানব%5েত নাই। বরং জরায় স
বিলয়ােছ, এস.এ. রকড স=ঠক না ব=ঠক তাহা স বিলেত পাের নাই।
িড.ডি:উ.-১ AvZ¥wek¦v‡mi সিহত বিলেত পাের নাই য, এস.এ. রকড
স=ঠক নয়। এস.এ. রকড সংেশাধেনর জন/ উহার িব?ে@ সরকারপ(
কােনা মামলা কের নাই। AেBর িভি না থািকেল Cধু রকড Dারা
AেBর সৃ=E হয় না। আবার যিদ AেBর িভি থােক, তাহা হইেল CধুমাF
রকড না হওয়ার কারেণ AB নE হয় না। এ স'েক উG আদালেতর
ন%জর রিহয়ােছ। নািলশী জিমেত বাদীপে(র দখল আেছ—উ7 মেম
বাদীপে(র সকল সা(ীগণ সা(/ Hদান কিরয়ােছন। বাদীপে(র
সা(ীেদর ব7েব/ কােনা কনIািডJির বা সK-কনIািডJির ব7ব/
নাই। উপেরা7 সরকারী িববাদীপে(র সা(ী িড.ডি:উ.-১ মাঃ জবলুল
রহমান জরায় বিলয়ােছন, সরকার নািলশী জিমর সেরজিমেন দখল
কের না। জরায় আরও বিলয়ােছন, নািলশী জিম সরকার কাহােকও
িলজ Hদান কেরন নাই। সুতরাং দখা যায়, বাদীপ( নািলশী জিম দখল
ও ভাগ কের। বাদীপ( তাহােদর দািবমেত িস.এস. ও এস.এ. পচা এবং
খিরদা দিলল দািখল কিরয়ােছ। নািলশী জিম দখল কের, ইহাও Hমাণ
কিরয়ােছ। অপরিদেক সরকার িববাদীপ( Hমাণ কিরেত পাের নাই য,

িকেসর িভিেত নািলশী জিমর আর.এস. রকড সরকােরর নােম
হইয়ােছ।”
It further transpires from the impugned appellate
judgment that the learned District Judge, while reversing
the well-reasoned findings of the trial Court, made the
following observations:
“িস.এস. খিতয়ান Hদশনী-১-এ নািলশী দাগDেয়র মLব/ কলােম নবীন
ও রাকমােনর নাম িলিখত আেছ। উ7 খিতয়ান দৃেE দখা যায় য,
মLব/ কলােম িলিখত নামMেলার মেধ/ DËi সীমানার দখলকার
িহেসেব নবীন এবং রাকমােনর দখেলর িবষয়=ট বুঝােনা হইয়ােছ।
কােজই এই (েF বাদীপে(র দািবমেত িস.এস. রকডQয় Hজাগেণর
মেধ/ আেপাষ চাহােম লালচাঁদ নািলশী দাগDেয়র জিম দখল কিরেতন—
সই িবষয়=ট Hমািণত হয় না। কােজই এই (েF িবS িনT আদালত এ
দেশর ভূিম ব/বUাপনায় শিরকগেণর আেপাষ Qvnvg মেত শিরক
একজেনর দাগ বা অংেশ ভাগদখল করার িবষয় উেVখ কিরয়া, বW পূব
হইেত Hচিলত িনয়েমর উেVখপূবক লালচাঁদ িবXাস আেপাষ Qvnvg
নািলশী দাগDেয়র জিম ভাগদখল কিরত মেম য িস@াL Yহণ
কিরয়ােছন, তাহােক স=ঠক িস@াL বলা যায় না।”
The learned Appellate Court also proceeded to observe
that:

“বাদীপ( হইেত নািলশী জিমর দখেলর সমথেন কােনা দািলিলক
Hমাণ দািখল করা হয় নাই। িপ.ডি:উ.-১ তাহার সাে(/ বিলয়ােছন য,
নািলশী জিমর উের আবু সাঈদ, দি(েণ Avhvnvi আলী, প%&েম
ফজর শখ, বতমােন তাহার ছেলরা আেছ। িপ.ডি:উ.-২ Avhvnvi আলী
তাহার সাে(/ বিলয়ােছন য, নািলশী জিমর দি(েণ তাহার ২ (দুই)
ট\করা জিম আেছ। রমজান আলীেক নািলশী জিম খিরেদর পর হইেত
ভাগদখল কিরয়া আিসেত দিখয়ােছন। নািলশী জিম সরকার
ভাগদখল কের না। বাদী খিরেদর পর নািলশী জিমেত কান মােসর কত
তািরেখ, কান িদেন দখেল িগয়ােছ, তাহা স=ঠকভােব বিলেত পােরন
নাই। বাদীর সাে(/র সময় িতিনও এজলােস উপিUত িছেলন। উপযু7
আেলািচত িপ.ডি:উ.-১ ও িপ.ডি:উ.-২-এর সা(/ হইেত দখা যায় য,
িপ.ডি:উ.-২ নািলশী জিমেত বাদীর দখেলর িবষেয় সা(/ Hদান
কিরেলও অপর কােনা সা(ীর সা(/ Dারা তাহার দখল িবষয়ক Hদ
সা(/=ট সমিথত হয় নাই।”
Having examined the above findings of both the
Courts below in juxtaposition with the evidence available
on record, I am unable to persuade myself to subscribe to
the conclusions ultimately reached by the learned
Appellate Court. The reversal of the decree passed by the
learned trial Court appears to have been founded not
upon a comprehensive re-appreciation of the entire

evidence but rather upon isolated observations detached
from the totality of the materials on record.
At the very outset, the learned Appellate Court
appears to have misdirected itself in holding that the
plaintiff's claim based upon aposh saham was not
established. It is evident from the record that no rival
heirs of the original C.S. tenants ever disputed the alleged
arrangement, nor did any co-sharer come forward
claiming any portion of the suit land. The existence of an
aposh saham is essentially a question of fact which may
be established not merely by documentary evidence but
also by long, uninterrupted possession coupled with the
conduct of the parties. The learned trial Court rightly took
into consideration the prevailing customary practice
among co-sharers whereby possession over specific plots
is enjoyed in accordance with family arrangement or
mutual partition without immediate mutation or formal
documentation. Such findings were reached after

evaluating the evidence in its entirety and could not have
been lightly interfered with unless shown to be perverse.
Moreover, the testimony of P.W.2, Azahar Ali, in my
considered
opinion,
substantially
corroborates
the
evidence of P.W.1. P.W.2 not only identified the
boundaries of the suit land with certainty but also
categorically deposed regarding the plaintiff's possession
after purchase. His testimony is consistent with the
surrounding circumstances and is not shaken in crossexamination. The learned Appellate Court, however,
isolated a portion of his deposition while completely
overlooking those parts which materially corroborate the
plaintiff's case. Such selective appreciation of evidence
amounts to misreading of material evidence and nonconsideration of relevant facts, which undoubtedly
constitutes an error of law warranting interference in
revisional jurisdiction.
The learned Appellate Court further observed that
the certified copy of the registered deed dated

22.04.1999, marked as Exhibit-3 (Gha), had been accepted
by the learned trial Court at the stage of delivery of
judgment. Even assuming the same to be correct, I do not
find any illegality committed by the learned trial Court. It
is well settled that a Civil Court possesses ample power to
receive or call for documentary evidence at any stage of
the proceeding if such evidence is necessary for
determining the real controversy between the parties,
provided no prejudice is occasioned to either side. The
exercise of such judicial discretion cannot, by itself,
constitute a ground for reversing an otherwise wellreasoned judgment, particularly when the authenticity of
the document itself remained unquestioned.
On an independent examination of the documentary
evidence, it further appears that the heirs of Ershad Ali
had already executed and registered a deed of
rectification being Deed No.750 dated 25.01.1994, much
prior to the execution and registration of the plaintiff's
purchase deed being No.2764 dated 22.04.1999. The

existence of the rectification deed substantially clarifies
the identity and description of the property and removes
any ambiguity regarding the subject matter of the
transfer. Consequently, the subsequent registered deed
executed in favour of the plaintiff cannot be discarded
merely
because
a
correction
had
earlier
been
incorporated by way of a rectification deed.
Significantly, the evidence of D.W.1, Md. Fazlur
Rahman, particularly his admissions elicited during crossexamination, assumes considerable importance. His
testimony
unmistakably
demonstrates
that
the
Government failed to disclose the legal foundation upon
which the suit land allegedly vested in the Government.
Neither acquisition proceedings, nor requisition, nor
vesting under any statutory provision, nor any lawful
process by operation of law has been established by
reliable evidence. On the contrary, the witness candidly
admitted material facts which substantially weaken the
Government's defence and lend support to the plaintiff's

claim. Such admissions constitute substantive evidence
against the party making them and cannot be ignored
while appreciating the evidence as a whole.
The inevitable consequence of the aforesaid
admissions is that the R.S. Record standing in the name of
the Government loses much of its evidentiary value. It is a
settled proposition of law that an entry in the record-ofrights neither creates nor extinguishes title. Unless the
Government is able to establish the source from which it
derived title, a mere recording of its name in the R.S.
Khatian cannot prevail over valid documents of title
coupled with possession. The learned Appellate Court
unfortunately overlooked this settled principle and
treated the R.S. record almost as conclusive proof of title,
which is legally impermissible.
Equally significant is the fact that neither of the
Courts below raised any issue regarding absence of cause
of action. The written statement filed by defendant No.1
also does not contain any specific pleading challenging the

maintainability of the suit on that ground. It is a cardinal
principle of civil jurisprudence that no party can be
permitted to travel beyond its pleadings. In the absence of
a specific plea, any argument advanced subsequently
regarding want of cause of action cannot be entertained
to defeat an otherwise maintainable suit.
In this regard, the decision reported in 50 DLR (1998)
134, in the case of Binode Bihari Ghose Vs Assistant
Custodian, Vested and Non-Resident Property and
others, squarely supports the plaintiff's case. Their
Lordships categorically held that failure to rectify a sale
deed does not extinguish the title acquired thereunder
and that Section 31 of the Specific Relief Act is merely an
enabling provision. It was further held that where
possession has already been delivered pursuant to the
sale, a Court exercising equitable jurisdiction is competent
to rectify an obvious mutual mistake even in a declaratory
suit instead of relegating the parties to another round of
litigation. The ratio of the aforesaid decision is directly

applicable to the facts of the present case and completely
answers the objections raised regarding the alleged defect
in the description of the property.
Likewise, in 32 DLR (1980) 252, in Sultanuddin
Chowdhury Vs. Government of the People's Republic of
Bangladesh and others, their Lordships authoritatively
declared that entries in the record-of-rights are merely
evidence of possession at the time of preparation of the
records and do not constitute proof of title. A registered
conveyance, unless avoided or cancelled by a competent
Civil Court on proof of fraud or other recognized legal
grounds, shall prevail over inconsistent entries in the
record-of-rights. This principle has consistently been
followed by our superior Courts and leaves little room for
controversy.
Applying the aforesaid settled principles to the facts
of the present case, it becomes manifest that the learned
Appellate Court failed to appreciate the legal effect of the
registered deeds, the rectification deed, the admissions

made by the Government witness, and the consistent oral
evidence adduced by the plaintiff's witnesses. Instead of
meeting the well-reasoned findings recorded by the
learned trial Court with convincing reasons, the learned
Appellate Court reversed the decree on assumptions and
conjectures unsupported by the evidence on record. Such
an approach amounts to misreading of evidence, nonreading of material evidence, and misapplication of
settled principles of law. Consequently, the impugned
judgment suffers from patent errors of law as well as
errors of fact, thereby occasioning failure of justice.
In the result, I find considerable substance in the
Rule. The learned Appellate Court travelled beyond the
evidence on record and failed to assign legally sustainable
reasons for reversing the comprehensive findings of the
learned trial Court. The impugned judgment and decree,
therefore, cannot be allowed to stand.
Accordingly, the Rule is made absolute without any
order as to costs.

The
impugned
judgment
and
decree
dated
01.02.2007 (decree drawn up thereunder and signed on
07.02.2007) passed by the learned District Judge,
Chuadanga, in Title Appeal No. 10 of 2006, allowing the
appeal, are hereby set aside.
However the judgment and decree dated 09.12.2005
(decree drawn up thereunder and signed on 18.09.2005)
passed by the learned Joint District Judge, First Court,
Chuadanga, in Title Suit No.92 of 2004, decreeing the suit,
are hereby restored and affirmed.
The order of status quo earlier granted by this Court
stands recalled and vacated.
Let the Subordinate Court's Records be transmitted
to the concerned Courts forthwith, along with a copy of
this judgment and order, for information and necessary
action.
( Abdur Rahman, J. )