In the Supreme Court of Bangladesh
(Criminal Miscellaneous Jurisdiction)

Present:

Mr. Justice K.M.. Hafizul Alam
and
                       Mr. Justice Abdur Rahamn

Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 48205 of 2021.

Shahid Ul Hasan.

  .........Petitioner.
-Versus-

The State and another.

.......... Opposite parties.

None appears.

……. For the petitioner.

Mr. Mohammad Jamal Hossain, Advocate

……… For the opposite party No.02.

Heard on 18.11.2025 and Judgment on
11.12.2025.

Judgment:

Abdur Rahman, J:

The petitioner has filed the instant criminal
miscellaneous case. The Court being satisfied issued a Rule
calling upon the opposite parties to show cause as to why
the proceedings of Sessions Case No. 17190 of 2020 arising
out of C.R. Case No. 40 of 2020, under section 138 read
with section 140 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
(shortly, the NI Act) now pending in the Court of Joint
Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Court No. 4, Dhaka as it
relates to the petitioner should not be quashed and/or pass
such other or further order or orders as to this Court may
seem fit and proper.

1.0 Background of Facts:

1.1
Facts relevant for disposal of the Rule, are that
the opposite party No.2 filed a petition of complaint under
section 138 read with section 140 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 before the Metropolitan Magistrate,

Cogniznce Court No. 28, Dhaka contending inter-alia that
the accused petitioner is a Director of the Infinity Data and
Power Limited that the complainant Bank has given various
loan facilities to the Infinity Data and Power Limited and
the Compay has drawn a cheque No. A5460836 dated
18.11.2019, for payment of BDT. 8,67,18,188.98 (Taka
Eight Crore Sixty-Seven Lac Eighteen Thousand One
Hundred Ninety-Eight Paisas); the said cheque was
dishonoured on 18.11.2019, and the complainant Bank
served legal notice demanding the cheque money, thus the
said notice was not received by the accused, hence the
complainant bank filed the case.
1.2
Learned Court of Metropolitan Magistrate,
Cognizance Court No. 28, Dhaka, took cognizance of the
offences thereunder and issued summons against the
accused persons. Accordingly, the petitioner surrendered
and obtained bail. The case was transferred to the learned
Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Dhaka, concerned, and the
learned Sessions Judge took cognizance of the alleged

offences, and the case was renumbered as Sessions Case
No. 17190 of 2020, and the case was transferred to the
learned Joint Metro Session Judge, 4th Court, Dhaka, for
holding trial. The accused petitioner applied under the
provisions of section 265C of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898, for getting discharge from the offence
alleged. But the learned Court was pleased to frame a charge
against the accused petitioner along with others.

1.3
Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the
aforesaid proceedings, the petitioner moved before this
Hon’ble Court and obtained the Rule without any order of
stay of the impugned proceedings.

1.4
The rule has been contested by the opposite
party No. 2, stating inter alia that the resignation of the
petitioner from the Board of Directors of the Company is a
matter of fact. Moreover, the present opposite party No. 2
was not aware of the petitioner's resignation from the
alleged company, and the action taken without prior
approval from the Bank is ineffective as per Section 27A of

the Bank Companies Act, 1991. Hence, the instant Rule is
liable to be discharged.

2.0
Submissions:

2.1
The learned Advocate for the petitioner, Ms.
Fariha Zaman, became absent at the time of the hearing,
though she received a copy of the Counter Affidavit. She
has also been informed of the matter fixed before this Court
by the learned Advocate for the contesting opposite party
No.2. However, on perusal of the petition, it appears that
the petitioner mainly relied upon four separate grounds,
which are as follows:
(i)
That the accused petitioner is not a Director in
the accused company, nor does he have any functions or
attributions in the business of the company after he resigns
from the post of Director on 14.10.2017 and hence the
impugned cheque issued on 18.11.2019 was not at all binds
the accused petitioner in any liability under section 138 of
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881;

(ii) That the accused petitioner has no liability under
Section 140 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 against
any Director or Officer of the company lies only he is in
charge of the business of the company but in the instant
case the complainant did not assert that the accused
petitioner in any way was involved in issuing the impugned
cheque which creates cause of action against the accused
and hence the impugned proceedings is liable to be
quashed;
(iii)  That the alleged complaint petition does not
disclose any cause of action against the accused petitioner
and hence the impugned proceedings are liable to be
quashed; and
(iv) That the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 and
Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 2003 are two special laws for
recovery of money rather than recovery of money through
ordinary civil court; when the question of loan recovery
comes then Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 2003 has exclusive
jurisdiction and thus Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 2003 has

become Special Law and the Negotiable Instruments Act,
1881 for recovery of money has become a General Law
andd as such the Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 2003 being special
law in the instnat case has clearly barred by filing the case
under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
and as such the impugned proceedings is liable to be
quashed.

2.2
Mr. Mohammad Jamal Hossain, the learned
Advocate appearing for the opposite party No. 2 Bank, has
made the following submissions:
(a)
That the issues raised by the petitioner in this
petition have already been settled by our Apex Court, and
accordingly, it’s nothing but a test case.
(b)
That tthe present opposite party No.2 was not
aware about the resignation of the petitioner from the
accuseed No.1, Company, however mere resignation of any
director of a loanee company shall not be effective without

prior approval of the Bank and hence no director shall be
entitled to trransfer or sell his shares without approval of
the Bank authority, but in tthe instant case there was no
prior approval regarding tthe reisgation of the petitioner
without prior approval from the Bank is ineffectivee as per
seection 27A of the Bank companies Act, 1991, moreover,
it now settled principal of law whether a director of a
compay knew issuancee of cheque or whether any director
was a person in charge of a company or whether he or she
is prima-facie responsible for day to day appears of the
company are matters of fact.
(c)  Learned Advocate has earnestly submitted that
there is no bar to proceed with the case under section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, arising out of the
loan liabilities simultaneously with the suit under Artha Rin
Adalat Ain, and as such, the instant Rule is liable to be
discharged.

(d)
That the learned Advocate for the opposite
party No.2, in support of his submissions, cited some
references of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, likely, 74
DLR (AD) 40; Judgment passed in Criminal Petition for
Leave to Appeal No. 1768-69 of 2019, etc.

3.0
Deliberations and Findings:

3.1
We have gone through the petition of the
criminal miscellaneous case, annexures, and perused the
other materials on record, as well as the cited cases as
referred to by the learned Advocate for the opposite party
No. 2.
At first, we want to mitigate the questions raised by
the petitioner who took ground likely, Artha Rin Adalat
Ain, 2003 has become Special Law and the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 for recovery of money has become a
General Law andd as such the Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 2003
being special law in the instnat case has clearly barred by
filing the case under Section 138 of the Negotiable

Instruments Act, 1881. In this context, our Apex Court
deals with the matter of the case of Eastern Bank Limited
vs. Md. Shirajuddula, reported in 72 DLR (AD) 79, whether
the pendency of the Artha Rin Suit against the accused on
the self-same issue is double jeopardy or not. In the said
case, the bank filed an Artha Rin Suit as well as a criminal
case under section 138 of the NI Act for the same purpose
and the same cause of action, i.e., recovery of loan. The
accused in that case prayed for quashing the proceeding
contending that the same was barred on the point of double
jeopardy. The Apex Court settled the issue, holding that the
pendency of a civil suit will not hinder the proceedings of a
criminal case and vice versa.
The other contention of the petitioner is that he was
not a Director in the accused company, nor did he had any
functions or attributions in the business of the company
after he resigned from the post of Director on 14.10.2017
and hence the impugned cheque issued on 18.11.2019 was
not at all binds the accused petitioner in any liability under

section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. In this
context, we examined the term ‘Director’ which has been
defined in the Companies Act, 1994 as under:
"2(f) "director" includes any person occupying the position
of director by whatever name called;

According to explanation (b) to section 140 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, "(b) director" in
relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm."

The Companies Act, 1994, and the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881, both imply that a director is a
partner of a company and holds a pivotal position in the
company concerned.

For a better understanding, we may examine the provisions
of Section 140 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881,
which provides that-
"140. (1) If the person committing an offence under
section 138 is a company, every person who, at the time
the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the

business of the company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any person liable to punishment if he proves that
the offence was committed without his knowledge, or that
he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.  (Underline given by us)

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where any offence under this Act has been committed by a
company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly."

For the case in our hand, the paramount consideration is
whether the petitioner was ‘in charge of, and was
responsible for, and for the conduct of the business of the
company’, which definitely comes under the purview of the
question of facts.

Indeed, merely a person being a director, manager,
secretary, or other officer of a company does not make
them liable for the offence under Section 138 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. But in case of offence
committed under section 138 of the Act by a company,
every person in charge of the company shall be liable until
he/she can prove by dint of evidence that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or he had exercised all
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

On the contrary, the opposite party, Bank, raised a
reasonable question that mere resignation of any director
of a loanee company shall not be effective without prior
approval of the Bank, but in the instant case there was no
prior approval regarding tthe reisgation of the petitioner
without prior approval from the Bank is ineffectivee as per
seection 27A of the Bank companies Act, 1991. To
mitigate this point, we can examine the provision of
Section 27A of the ut supra, as are-

“27K| ‡`bv`vi †Kv¤úvbx ev cÖwZôv‡bi cwiPvjK ev cwiPvjbv
KZ…©c‡ÿi m`m¨‡`i Dci wewa-wb‡la|- AvcvZZt ejer Ab¨ ‡Kvb
AvB‡b hvnv wKQzB _vKzK bv †Kb, FY`vZv e¨vsK ev Avw_©K cÖwZôv‡bi
cwiPvjK ch©` ev, †ÿÎgZ, DaŸ©Zb KZ©„c‡ÿi Aby‡gv`b e¨ZxZ, †Kvb
†`bv`vi †Kv¤úvbx ev cÖwZôv‡bi †Kvb cwiPvjK ev cwiPvjbv KZ…©c‡ÿi

†Kvb m`‡m¨i c`Z¨vM Kvh©Ki nB‡e bv Ges †Kvb cwiPvjK Zvnvi †kqvi
n¯ÍvšÍi ev weÎq Kwi‡Z cvwi‡eb bv|Ó

From a plain reading of the provisions of the aforesaid
section, it looks like a gemstone that if any director of a
company resigns or leaves the business or sells his share(s),
he has to get sanction from the financial institution
concerned with the affairs of his company. In the instant
case, the petitioner failed to show such a kind of sanction.
He claimed in paragraph No.5 of the instant application
that he resigned from the directorship of the company, and
the said resignation was accepted by the company before
issuing the impugned cheque, which definitely falls under
the purview of the question of facts, and resultantly, the
petitioner has the scope to prove the materials in trial.

From the aforementioned facts, submissions, grounds
taken by the petitioner, and the proposition of law, our
considered view is that prior approval is not necessary,
even subsequent approval of the bank or financial
institution can suffice the purpose of section 27A of the
Bank Companies Act, 1991, and moreso, to mitigate the
question of facts, the best forum is the trial, unless it is
shown that preposterous facts, barred by law or abuse of
the process of the Court, are available in flagrante delicto in
the case.

In view of the above discussions, we do not find any
merit in the rule.

Accordingly, the Rule is discharged without any order
as to costs.

Communicate a copy of the judgment and order to
the concerned Court at once.

     ( Abdur Rahman, J )
K.M.  Hafizul Alam, J

I agree.

                                                    (K.M. Hafizul Alam, J)