IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
     (SPECIAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)

Writ Petition No. 13635 of 2024

IN THE MATTER OF:
An application under Article 102 of the
Constitution of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh.

-AND-

IN THE MATTER OF:

Laila Shahed

     ......Petitioner
               -Versus-

Bangladesh, represented by the Secretary,
Ministry of Defence and others

                              ..... Respondents
                               Mr. M. Sarwar Hossain, Advocate
                ...For the petitioner
Mr. Md. Abdul Alim Miah (Jewel), Advocate with
Ms. Momtaj Parvin, Advocate,
Mr. Rafaelur Rahman, Advocate and
Ms. Amena Siddika, Advocate
  .... For the respondent No. 8

Heard on 30.07.2026
Judgment on 03.08.2026

Urmee Rahman, J:
In the instant matter a Rule Nisi was issued on an application
under Article 102 of the Constitution of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh in the following terms:
“Let a Rule Nisi be issued calling upon the
respondents
to
show
cause
as
to
why
the
inaction/failure of the respondent concerned to issue
warishan certificate after the death of the mother of
the petitioner who was the permanent resident of
Present:
Mr. Justice Sashanka Shekhar Sarkar
And
Justice Urmee Rahman

Dhaka Cantonment, shall not be declared to have been
done without lawful authority and hence, is of no legal
effect and/or such other or further order or orders
passed as to this Court may seem fit and proper.”
Facts leading to the issuance of the instant Rule, in short, are
that, the father of the petitioner Mr. Harunur Rashid died on
14.04.1999 and thereafter her mother Israt Jahan got re-married on
01.05.2003 with one Mr. Nurul Islam, son of Md. Ashraf Ali.
Subsequently, petitioner’s mother divorced her second husband Mr.
Nurul Islam on 31.03.2018. No child was born out of their wedlock
during that period. After divorce, petitioner’s mother filed Family
Suit No.582/2021 in the Court of 1st Senior Assistant Judge and
Family Court, Dhaka, where in the plaint she asserted that during
her marriage to her second husband, she conceived once; however,
the pregnancy was terminated following an abortion after three
months. Subsequently, she and her second husband adopted
respondent No. 8 as their son in the presence of several witnesses.
The mother of the petitioner died on 31.12.2023 leaving behind the
petitioner as her only daughter, 5(five) brothers and 1(one) sister
and since then the petitioner is trying to get the warishan certificate
from the respondent No. 5, under whose jurisdiction the petitioner
has permanent address but unable to get the same due to an
application filed by the respondent No.8. Lastly, the petitioner
applied for the warishan certificate on 28.08.2024 and the
respondent No. 5 replied vide memo dated 11.09.2024 advising the

petitioner to go to the court to resolve the dispute regarding the
heirs certificate.
Being aggrieved by the impugned memo issued by the
respondent No. 5 and there having no other alternative equally and
efficacious remedy available, the petitioner has filed the instant writ
petition and obtained the present Rule.
On the prayer of the petitioner, this Division at the time of
issuance of the Rule was pleased to direct the respondent Nos. 6
and 7 to take necessary steps in due compliance of law in
conducting DNA Test of the petitioner and the respondent No. 8 as
per Section 12(a), (d), (f) of DNA Act, 2014 in order to determine
their relationship within a period of 4(four) weeks from the date of
receipt of the copy of this order.
In compliance with the said direction of this Court, a DNA
Test was conducted at the National Forensic DNA Profiling
Laboratory (NFDPL), Dhaka Medical College Hospital and the
report was submitted before the Registrar General on 31.05.2025.
The report was submitted before this Court on 02.07.2025 as
appears from the order sheet.  In the conclusion part of the report it
has been stated that:
“Based on the results of DNA analysis, it
is sufficient to conclude that LAILA SHAHED
and NUHER ISLAM are highly likely to be
unrelated to each other.”

Learned Advocate Mr. M Sarwar Hossain, appearing on
behalf of the petitioner submits that, petitioner’s mother died on
31.12.2023 leaving behind 1(one) daughter i.e. the petitioner
herself, 5(five) brothers and 1(one) sister and since then she has
been trying to obtain the warishan certificate from the respondent
No. 5 i.e. the Cantonment Board under whose jurisdiction the
petitioner has her permanent address, but the authority is not
issuing the same in her favour because of an application filed by the
respondent No. 8. Hence she has no other option but to file this writ
petition challenging the memo issued by the respondent No. 5 in
this regard.
        Learned Advocate further submitted that, the petitioner is
lawfully entitled to obtain a heir certificate from the Cantonment
Board Authority on the death of her mother but they are not issuing
the certificate in gross violation of law, hence, the Rule is liable to
be made absolute.
On the other hand, Mr. Md. Abdul Alim Miah Jewel, the
learned Advocate entered appearance on behalf of the respondent
No. 8 and vehemently contested the Rule by filing an affidavit in
opposition.
It is the contention of learned Advocate for the respondent
No. 8 is that the respondent No. 8 is the legitimate son out of the
wedlock of Ishrat Jahan i.e. the deceased mother and father Nurul
Islam. Israt Jahan gave birth to respondent No. 8 at the Hospital,
Dhaka on 30.03.2005 and the birth was duly registered with the

Central Hospital under Registration No. 2646 of 2005 and the birth
certificate was issued accordingly. During the dispossession of
Respondent No. 8 from his residence situated at Flat-A/2, House16/H, Road-2/A, Dhaka Cantonment, Dhaka-1206, the illegal
occupant forcibly took away his original birth certificate along with
all other valuable personal documents under his possession. As a
result, he filed an application in the prescribed form to Central
Hospital, with reference to the original registration and upon
verification, a birth certificate was re-issued in his favour on
26.02.2024. Moreover, the birth of respondent No. 8 was registered
with Dhaka Cantonment Board on 13.03.2008 and the Birth
Certificate bearing Personal Identification. No. 2003 2620 8980
09255 was issued in confirmation thereof. The National Identity
Card being No. 557 925 9010 was issued in his name on
17.01.2025. Both the NID card and the passport of the respondent
No. 8 duly recorded Md. Nurul Islam and Israt Jahan as his parents.
Learned Advocate next submitted that, the respondent no. 8
disputes the claim of the petitioner that she is the daughter of
deceased Israt Jahan. By referring to Annexure-A to the writ
petition, which the Nikahnama of Israt Jahan dated 01.05.2003,
learned Advocate further submitted that, it has been specifically
mentioned therein that the marital status of Israt Jahan was
‘unmarried’ (Kygvix) at the time of her second marriage with Nurul
Islam and therefore, the very birth of the petitioner becomes
questionable.

Learned Advocate further submits that, the alleged DNA
Test report relied upon by the petitioner has been procured through
coercion, collusion, in connivance and by practicing fraud. The
report has not been proved by examination or testimony of the
issuing authority and as such, it cannot be treated as conclusive
evidence. Furthermore, Respondent No. 8 is the only biological son
of the deceased Israt Jahan and the petitioner bears no filial
relationship with her. Consequently, any assertion of DNA
compatibility between the petitioner and Respondent No. 8 is
unfounded, misleading, and devoid of merit and considering the
same, the Rule is liable to be discharged.
Learned Advocate very strongly submitted that, the
Cantonment Board, i.e. the Respondent Nos. 1-5 are not the
competent authority to determine the heirship of the deceased Israt
Jahan. Such adjudication of succession falls exclusively within the
jurisdiction of the learned District Judge as per the provisions of
Succession Act, 1925 and considering the same, the Rule issued in
the instant writ petition is liable to be discharged.
He finally submitted that, since the relief sought in the writ
petition involves complex and disputed questions of fact
particularly concerning paternity, maternity, and succession of the
deceased Israt Jahan, which requires adjudication through oral and
documentary evidence, such matter falls squarely outside the scope
of writ jurisdiction under Article 102 of the Constitution and must
be resolved by the appropriate civil court. Without availing the

appropriate available remedy, the petitioner has come before the
High Court Division. Hence, the same is misconceived and not
maintainable in the eye of law.
We have heard the learned Advocates for the respective
parties and perused the writ petition, affidavit in opposition and all
the documents annexed thereto.
It appears from the impugned memo dated 11.09.2024
(Annexure-D-1) that, the Cantonment Executive Officer by
referring 2 (two) applications filed by the petitioner as well as by
the respondent No. 8 categorically stated that, since both the
applicants claimed themselves to be the lawful heirs of deceased
Israt Jahan, such dispute is to be resolved through court and further
action may be taken subject to settlement of the dispute. Therefore,
he refrained from issuing any heir certificate to the petitioner. This
act of the respondent no. 5 correctly reflected the true legal position
and no illegality has been committed by the concerned authority in
issuing the impugned memo.
Besides, the petitioner neither in the writ petition nor in the
oral submission could place any legal ground to show what
illegality has been committed by the authority in issuing the
impugned order.
An heir certificate is issued by the Cantonment Board in the
capacity of an Administrative Office, where the documents are
submitted before it remains uncontested by any other parties. In the

present case, apparently 2(two) contrary applications are pending
before the authority. The Cantonment Executive Officer in his
administrative capacity cannot adjudicate this dispute by going
beyond the authority conferred upon him. This is purely a subject
matter to be raised before a competent civil court, who shall resolve
the dispute upon taking necessary evidence.
 The DNA report has been duly submitted by the authority
pursuant to the order issued by this Division at the time of the
issuance of the Rule. In this report though there is a finding as to
the relationship between the petitioner and the respondent No. 8,
we find that the DNA report cannot be treated as a conclusive proof
to resolve the dispute. This report is merely an evidence and not a
verdict. When a contradictory claim is found to be on record, no
decision can be given as to the issue of heirship solely based upon a
DNA report.
    In view of the foregoing, we are of the view that the dispute
between the parties as to whether the respondent no. 8 is or is not
an heir of the deceased is a disputed question of fact, requiring
adjudication upon evidence, and therefore cannot be resolved in
this writ jurisdiction. Accordingly, we refrain from expressing any
opinion on the merits of the rival contentions of the parties,
including as to the reliability or otherwise of the DNA report, the
manner of its procurement, the evidentiary value of the plaint filed
by the deceased in the earlier family suit, or the genuineness and
effect of the documents produced by the respondent no.8. All these

issues are left open to be agitated and established before the
competent civil court.
In view of the facts and circumstances discussed
hereinabove, we find no merit in the Rule.
In the result, the Rule is discharged.
However, without any order as to costs.
Let a copy of this judgment and order be communicated to
the concerned authorities at once.

Justice Sashanka Shekhar Sarkar, J:

I agree.

Helal/ABO