IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION)

              Present:
Mr.  Justice S M Kuddus Zaman

And
Ms. Justice Tamanna Rahman Khalidi

FIRST APPEAL No.31 of 2026
 Laxmi Bilders Limited

...Appellant

-Versus-
Masons Enterprise Limited and others

... Respondents
Mr.  Garib Newaz, Advocate with
Mr. Mohammad Mushruful Alam, Advocate
Ms. Maksuda Akhter, Advocate

... For the appellants.
Mr. Mohammad Ahasan, Advocate with
Mr. Mohammad Golam Kibria, Advocate

… For the respondents.
Heard on 16.08.2026 and  Judgment on 18.08.2026.

S M Kuddus Zaman, J:

This First Appeal is directed against the judgment and decree
dated 16.03.2026 passed by the learned Joint District Judge, 1st Court,
Dhaka in Title Suit No.931 of 2025 rejecting the plaint.

Facts in short are that the appellant as plaintiff instituted above
suit for specific performance of registered deed of bainapatra No.1176
dated 07.03.2022 alleging that defendant Nos.1-5 as the lawful owner
and possessor of above land agreed to sale the same to the plaintiff for

Taka 35,77,00,000/- and on receipt of Taka 2,08,00,000/- executed and
registered above bainapatra. It was stipulated in above bainapatra that
the defendant shall execute and register a sale deed within 90 days on
receipt of balance consideration money. The Chairman and a Director
of the defendant company died and the defendant requested for
extension of time for execution and registration of sale deed. The
defendant by above time received total consideration money but on
12.02.2025 refused to execute and register a sale deed.

On 16.03.2026 the learned Joint District Judge rejected the plaint
of above suit under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure
holding that the suit was barred by limitation.

Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with above judgment and
decree above plaintiff as appellant moved to this Court and preferred
this First Appeal.

Mr. Garib Newaz, learned Advocate for the appellant submits
that Order 7 Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 provides for
filing of a suit after expiry of period of limitation by providing the
grounds upon which exemption from limitation is claimed. In above
bainapatra it was agreed upon that within next nine months the
defendant shall on receipt of outstanding consideration money execute
and register a sale deed. But defendants extended above period of nine
months by issuing letters dated 13.05.2023, 25.11.2023 and 22.l08.2024
due to demise of their Chairman and a Director and difficulty in getting
succession certificate for substitution of their heirs and other legal

complications.  In the meantime on the demand of the defendants the
plaintiff paid a total amount of Taka 35,75,00000/- out of Taka
35,77,00000/-. By above conduct and action the defendants have
waived the period of nine months for execution of sale deed.

On 28.01.2025 the defendants in reply to the legal notice of the
plaintiff refused to execute and register a sale deed and the plaintiff
filed above suit on 24.09.2025 within the period of limitation. The
learned
District
Judge
totally
misconceived
above
facts
and
circumstances of the case and Article 113 of the Limitation Act, 1908
and most illegally rejected the plaint which is not tenable in law.

Mr. Mohammad Ahasan, learned Advocate for respondent Nos.15 frankly concedes that the limitation is a mixed question of law and
facts and the learned Joint District Judge misconceived the provision of
Article 113 and committed an error in rejecting the plaint suo moto
under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
However, the learned Advocate produced a bunch of documents
relating to filing and withdrawal by the plaintiff a of a previous suit for
specific performance of above bainapatra and filing of a Criminal Case
by the defendants against the plaintiff for creation of false money
receipts showing payment of consideration money to the defendants
and submits that the plaint should have been rejected for creation of
false and forged money receipts and filing this Second Suit for the
enforcement of bainapatra. The learned Advocate lastly submits that
above Criminal Case has been investigated by the Crime Investigation

Department of police and charge sheet has been submitted against the
plaintiff.

We have considered the submissions of the learned Advocates for
the respective parties and carefully examined all materials on record.

It is admitted that the defendants agreed to sale above property to
the plaintiff for Taka 35,77,00000/- and on receipt of Taka 2,08,00000/-
executed and register a bainpatra on 07.03.2022. It is also admitted that
in above bainapatra it was stipulated that within next nine months the
plaintiff shall pay outstanding consideration money and defendants
shall execute and register a sale deed.

Appellant as plaintiff filed above suit on 24.09.2025 for specific
performance of above bainapatra. The defendants entered appearance
in above suit on 11.03.2026 and submitted a petition for time for filing
written statement. The learned Joint District Judge suo moto fixed
above suit for maintainability hearing and on 16.03.2026 rejected the
plaint under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure holding
that above suit was barred by limitation.

Order 7 Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 provides for
filing of suit after expiry of the period of limitation in the following
terms:-
“6. Where the suit is instituted after the expiration
of the period prescribed by the law of limitation,
the plaint shall show the ground upon which
exemption from such law is claimed.”

Above provision shows that plaintiff may institute a suit after
expiry of the period of limitation and in the plaint the plaintiff shall
state the grounds which exempts the suit from the limitation.  A
plaintiff may have legal disabilities or special cause or grounds which
prevented him to file the suit within the period of limitation. There are
may be cases in which the opposite party sought extension of time for
performance of the contract. Above contentions issues of facts requires
determination by the Court on consideration of the evidence. The
question of limitation is a mixed question of law and facts and a plaint
cannot be rejected on the basis of contentious facts.

Article 113 of the Limitation Act, 1908 provides as follows:-
Description
Period of limitation
Time from which period
begins to run.
For
specific
performance of a
contract.
One year
The
date
fixed
for
the
performance, or, if no such
date is fixed, when the
plaintiff
has
notice
that
performance is refused.

The limitation for suit for specific performance of contract is one
year and the limitation shall start to run from the date fixed by the
parties in the deed of contract or if no such date is fixed from the date of
refusal of performance. Above deed of bainapatra provided nine
months for its performance. The plaintiff has produced three written
letters of the defendants dated 13.05.2023, 25.11.2023 and 22.08.2024
which show that the defendants requested for extension of above time
due to demise of their Chairman and a Director and difficulties in

getting succession certificates for substitution of their heirs and other
inconveniences. A suit cannot be filed against the dead persons.  The
learned Advocate for the respondents did not dispute the genuinity and
correctness of above three letters of the defendants seeking extension of
time for performance of above bainapatra. Above letters of the
defendants extended the performance of above bainapatra from nine
months to one year from the date of refusal of performance. As such the
later part of Article 113 of the Limitation Act which provides one year
period from the date of refusal of performance of above bainapatra
becomes the starting date for counting of limitation for above suit.

It turns out from the letter of the defendants dated 12.02.2025 that
the defendants denied performance of above bainapatra. As such the
limitation for above suit starts to run from 12.02.2025 and the plaintiff
filed above suit on 24.09.2025 within the statutory period of limitation.

The learned Advocate for the respondents has submits that the
plaintiff has forged some money receipts to show payment of total
consideration money and defendants as complaint filed a Criminal Case
for forgery of above money receipts. Above claims involve contentious
facts which needs to be determined by the trial court on consideration
of evidence.

A plaint can be rejected under Order 7 Rule 11(d) if the suit is
barred by any law and not on the basis of facts and the learned Judge
while rejecting the plaint under above provision must mention the law
which prohibits the institution of the suit.

On consideration of above facts and circumstances of the case and
materials on record we hold that above suit was filed within the
statutory period of limitation as has been provided by Article 113 of the
Limitation Act, 1908 but the learned Joint District Judge utterly
misconceived above facts and the provision of the law and most
illegally rejected the plaint on the basis of contentions facts which is not
tenable in law.

In above view of the materials on record we find substance in this
First Appeal which deserves to be allowed.

In the result, the First Appeal is allowed.

The impugned judgment and decree dated 16.03.2026 passed by
the learned Joint District Judge, 1st Court, Dhaka in Title Suit No.931 of
2025 is set aside.

The learned Joint District Judge is directed to proceed with the
trial of above suit expeditiously in accordance with law.

However, there will be no order as to cost.
Send down the lower Court’s record immediately.

Tamanna Rahman Khalidi , J:

                             I agree.

MD. MASUDUR RAHMAN
     BENCH OFFICER