IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(SPECIAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)

         Present:

 Ms. Justice Kazi Zinat Hoque
     And
          Ms. Justice Aynun Nahar Siddiqua

Writ Petition No. 7055 of  2025

In the matter of :

An application under Article 102(2)(b)(i) of
the Constitution of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh.
-And-

In the matter of :
Rujina Akhter

 …… Petitioner

-VERSUS-

Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, represented by its Secretary,
Public Security Division, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Secretariat Building, Shahbagh,
Dhaka and others
      ……Respondents
Mr. Manzur-Al-Matin, Senior Advocate with
Mr. Prince-Al-Masud, Advocate
.... For the Petitioner.
Dr. Md. Golam Rahman Bhuiyan, DAG with
Mr. Nur Muhammad Azami, DAG

 …. For Respondent Nos. 2 and 3
Mrs. Fawzia Karim Firoze, Senior Advocate
with Mr. Quazi Maruful Alam, Advocate

     ….For the respondent Nos.7 and 8

Mr. Md. Lutfor Rahman, Advocate

…… For the respondent No.9

Date  of  Hearing: 30.06.2025,
01.07.2025, 03.07.2025, 17.07.2025.

 Date of Judgment: 24.07.2025.

Kazi  Zinat Hoque, J :
In this application under Article 102(2)(b)(i) of the
Constitution, a Rule Nisi has been issued calling upon the
respondents to show cause as to why the baby boy Basmin
Abrar date of birth 14.07.2024 now confined in the name of
custody and guardianship of the respondent Nos.7 and 8 should
not be brought before this Hon’ble Court so that this Court
may satisfy itself that the minor detenue is not being held in
custody without lawful authority and/or such other or further
order or orders passed as to this Court may seem fit and proper.
Relevant Facts:
The petitioner filed this writ petition contending that her
marriage was solemnized with Md. Zasim Uddin and during
their wedlock the detenu, namely Basmin Abrar, was born on
14.7.2024. She challenged the alleged confinement of the
minor in the custody of respondent Nos. 7 and 8. She also
contended that the biological father of the minor is Md. Zasim
Uddin, husband of the petitioner.

The petitioner further contended that during their
conjugal life, a baby was previously born by caesarean delivery
who unfortunately died shortly after birth. The couple has been
working as readymade garment workers in Hemayetpur, Savar,
Dhaka.
The petitioner and her husband later had another baby
boy, born by caesarean section at Nari-Shishu Hospital and
Diagnostic Center on 14.07.2024. After treatment, both the
newborn and the petitioner, i.e., the mother, were discharged
from the hospital on 16.07.2024. After returning home, the
newborn fell ill due to oxygen deficiency, and the parents
admitted him to the NICU of Super Medical Hospital (Pvt.)
Limited, Savar, on 17.07.2024. On the same day, the hospital
authorities referred the infant to Universal Medical College and
Hospital, Mohakhali, Dhaka for advanced treatment. Due to
severe financial hardship and the prevailing political unrest
across the country, particularly in Dhaka, and because of the
lockdown at that time, the father could not immediately shift
the baby to the referred hospital. After collecting money, Md.

Zasim Uddin finally admitted the infant to Universal Medical
College and Hospital on 19.07.2024, depositing Tk. 3,000/- as
the admission fee, Tk. 10,000/- as advance payment, and Tk.
23,138/- on 19.07.2024 to cover the remaining amount of the
bill dated 19.07.2024, totaling Tk. 36,138/-.
The petitioner further contended that the father tried
rigorously to collect money by engaging himself in different
types of work, but due to the countrywide political turmoil and
lockdown, he failed to raise the required funds for the
continued treatment of his newborn baby. As the city was
under lockdown, it was not possible to shift the baby to any
government hospital. The petitioner’s husband repeatedly
communicated with the hospital authorities, but they allegedly
withheld information about the baby and refused visitation
without further deposit. During the student movement against
the then Government, violent clashes erupted, and the father
was compelled to leave the hospital premises for safety
reasons.

After the new Government assumed office, the petitioner
and her husband again visited the hospital on 10.08.2024 to
inquire about their baby, but the hospital authorities demanded
Tk. 8–9 lakhs as medical expenses. Upon learning this, the
parents returned to their permanent residence to arrange funds
by selling ancestral property. Suddenly, on 15.04.2025, the
Officer-in-Charge of Bhola Police Station informed them by
mobile phone that they must appear at the local police station.
On 16.04.2025, they appeared and learned that a General Diary
(GD) No.1205 dated 22.07.2024 had been lodged concerning
their baby, and a copy of the GD was supplied to them. They
were further directed to appear before respondent No.4, who
handed them a notice dated 17.03.2025, which the petitioner
alleged to be backdated and manipulated, as the notice was
issued to the parents at their permanent address.
After consulting relatives, the petitioner met her lawyer
on 19.04.2025. The learned lawyer communicated with
Tejgaon Police Station, Dhaka regarding the GD. The
Investigating Officer informed the learned lawyer that the baby

was in the custody of respondent No. 3. The petitioner’s lawyer
then contacted respondent No. 3, who informed that the baby
was now in the custody of respondent Nos. 7 and 8, who claim
to have been granted guardianship, custody, and authority to
obtain a passport for the minor through Family Suit No. 884 of
2024, allegedly decreed on 30.09.2024, within only ten (10)
days of filing the suit on 19.09.2024.
The petitioner repeatedly requested respondent Nos. 7
and 8 to arrange a meeting with her baby, but they ignored her
pleas. The petitioner reasonably apprehends that respondent
Nos. 7 and 8 may remove the child from Bangladesh within a
short time. Respondent Nos.7 and 8 are citizens of the United
Kingdom, and if the minor is taken outside the jurisdiction of
Bangladesh, he may never be traced, causing the petitioner to
lose her baby forever. In such circumstances, finding no other
equally efficacious remedy, the petitioner was constrained to
file the instant writ petition under Article 102(2)(b)(i) of the
Constitution of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.
Submission of the Learned Counsels

Submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner:
Mr. Manzur-Al-Matin, learned Senior Advocate with Mr.
Prince-Al Masud, learned Advocate representing the petitioner,
argued that the petitioner, being the biological mother of the
minor detenu, Basmin Abrar (date of birth 14.07.2024), is
entitled to the custody of the child. He contended that the
respondent hospital authorities most illegally and arbitrarily
transferred the child to Choto Moni Nivas, Azimpur, Dhaka
without informing the petitioner or her husband. Thereafter,
respondent Nos. 7 and 8 filed a Family Suit seeking
guardianship and custody of the minor boy. He further argued
that the trial court, in a hurried manner and without lawful
notice to the biological parents, illegally and arbitrarily decreed
the suit, following which the child was handed over to
respondent Nos. 7 and 8. He submitted that since respondent
Nos. 7 and 8 are citizens of the United Kingdom, the petitioner
reasonably apprehends that they may, within a short period of
time, remove the child beyond the jurisdiction of Bangladesh,
and if they do so, the child may never be traced and the
petitioner will lose her child forever. He therefore asserted that

the petitioner, as the biological mother, is entitled to custody of
the child and that the child is being illegally confined by
respondent Nos. 7 and 8. He further argued that it is a wellsettled principle of law that fraud vitiates everything, and since
the biological parents were not made parties to the aforesaid
Family Suit and the trial court delivered judgment with undue
haste and without lawful notice, the judgment and decree are
liable to be set aside, as fraud vitiates all judicial acts. He also
submitted that in determining the welfare of the minor child,
the Court should not be constrained by technicalities.
The learned counsel for the petitioner referred to a
decision of the Appellate Division in the case of Abdul Jalil
and others vs. Sharon Laily Begum Jalil [50 DLR (AD) (1998)
55], wherein the Hon’ble Appellate Division held that:
“In a proceeding for custody of a child, it is not the rights of
the parties, but the rights of the child which are at issue.”
He further referred to paragraph 33 of the judgment in
Abdul Jalil and others vs. Sharon Laily Begum Jalil [50 DLR
(AD) 55] wherein it was observed that, ordinarily, minor

children should remain with their mother as long as she does
not incur any disqualification for such custody. He submitted
that the mother suffers from no disqualification whatsoever.
He also cited the decision in Bangladesh Jatiyo Mahila
Ainjibi Samity (BJMAS) vs. Ministry of Home Affairs and
others [61 DLR (2009) 371], wherein it was held that:
“In a proceeding under Article 102(2)(b)(i), it is not the rights
of the parties, but the rights of the children that are at issue.”
He accordingly prayed that the Rule be made absolute
and the child be handed over to the petitioner, i.e., the
biological mother.
Argument of the learned counsels for the respondents :
The Rule was opposed by respondent Nos. 2, 3, 7, 8, and
9 by filing separate affidavits-in-opposition. Dr. Md. Golam
Rahman Bhuiyan with Mr. Nur Muhammad Azami, learned
Deputy Attorney General representing respondent Nos. 2 and
3, argued that the child was admitted to the NICU of Universal
Medical College and Hospital, Mohakhali, Dhaka for nearly

two months, and after providing necessary life-saving
treatment, the hospital authorities, having failed to locate the
biological parents, handed the child over to Choto Moni Nivas,
Azimpur, Dhaka, a Government institution for the care and
protection of abandoned and destitute children. He further
argued that respondent Nos. 7 and 8, being a childless couple,
subsequently filed Family Suit No. 884 of 2024, and through
legal process, guardianship and custody were granted to them
by a competent Family Court. He contended that the biological
parents had abandoned the child, which is evident from their
conduct, particularly as they did not lodge any General Diary
regarding the child’s whereabouts. He referred to section 317
of the Penal Code, submitting that abandonment of a child
below twelve years is punishable with imprisonment which
may extend to seven years, or fine, or both, and argued that the
biological parents are liable to be prosecuted under section
317. He also referred to section 84 of the Children Act, 2013,
which provides for alternative care for deprived children and
children in conflict with the law. He further submitted that
since the impugned custody was granted by a competent civil

court, this writ petition is not maintainable in view of the
existence of an alternative remedy.
Respondent Nos. 7 and 8 also opposed the Rule. Mrs.
Fawzia Karim Firoze, learned Senior Advocate with Mr. Quazi
Maruful Alam, learned Advocate representing respondent Nos.
7 and 8, argued that they are dual citizens of both Bangladesh
and the United Kingdom. She contended that they lawfully
obtained guardianship and custody of the minor by filing the
appropriate suit before the Family Court and that the decree
was passed without contest after the Court was satisfied about
the child’s welfare. She argued that the biological parents have
not visited the child since 19.07.2024, nor lodged any GD,
which amounts to abandonment and constitutes disqualification
for custody under personal law. She further submitted that the
Police temporarily took custody of the child after issuance of
the Rule, although no such order was passed by this Court, and
that respondent Nos. 7 and 8 and their relatives visited the
child during police custody, which demonstrates their affection
and continued commitment to the child’s upbringing. She

argued that despite being aware that the child was at Hatirjheel
Police Station for a few days, the petitioner made no attempt to
visit him. She further cited decisions from the sub-continent
emphasizing that the best interest and welfare of the child must
be the paramount consideration. She also relied on Sharon
Laily Begum Jalil [50 DLR (AD) 55] to assert that the rights of
the child prevail over claims of the parents, and submitted that
the child is living a healthy, stable, and cared-for life with
respondent Nos. 7 and 8, and therefore his welfare lies in
remaining in their custody. She also referred to principles from
D.F. Mulla’s Muslim Law, arguing that a mother may lose her
right to custody if disqualified, and submitted that
abandonment by the petitioner and her husband constitutes
such disqualification. She accordingly prayed that the Rule be
discharged, as the petition is not maintainable due to the
availability of an alternative forum for appeal. She also argued
that the writ petition involves disputed question of fact which
is not amenable to writ jurisdiction.

The Rule was further opposed by respondent No.9
(Universal Medical College and Hospital) by filing an
affidavit-in-opposition. Mr. Md. Lutfor Rahman, learned
Advocate representing respondent No.9, argued that the infant
was admitted by the petitioner’s husband on 19.07.2024 in
critical condition, and that the hospital immediately placed the
child on life support after conducting necessary diagnostic
tests. He submitted that at around 8:30 PM on the date of
admission, the hospital authorities searched for the father for
counseling, but he was not present. The hospital then called the
contact number provided in the admission form, and the father
stated that he was away because his wife was also ill and
assured that he would return soon. However, despite repeated
calls, he did not return to the hospital. Having failed to trace
the biological parents and finding no other alternative, the
hospital lodged GD No. 1205 dated 22.07.2024 with Tejgaon
Police Station, stating the following:
“ প঩সেন্ট ঩ার্টি লননফার েকাস঱ পপান নাম্বাসর পপান কসর
঩াওয়া যাসে না। তারা আর ঩যিন্ত পকান পযাগাসযাগ কসর

নাই। হেন঩টা঱ কততি঩ক্ষ ফারফার পেষ্টা কসর পপাসন ঩াই
নাই। প঩সেন্ট NICU ঱াইপ োস঩াসটি আসে।”
He submitted that the hospital continued treatment
despite non-payment of bills, and that after the child recovered,
the hospital authorities formally handed him over to Choto
Moni Nivas on 18.09.2024, which is evident from AnnexureY-3, being a letter issued by the Director of Universal Medical
College and Hospital addressed to the Deputy Caretaker, Choto
Moni Nivas, Azimpur, Dhaka. He further contended that the
hospital attempted to return the child to the biological parents
without insisting on payment, but they refused to accept the
child, which was clearly recorded in the letter dated 18.09.2024
(Annexure-Y-3) in the following terms:
“হাে঩াতা঱ কততি঩ক্ষ ফসকয়া নফ঱ ঩নরসলাধ না করার লসতি ফাচ্চা
প্রদান করসত রাজি থাকস঱ও ফাচ্চার গানডিয়ান/ফাফা ফাচ্চা গ্রহণ
করসত অস্বীকতনত িানান।”
He therefore prayed that the Rule be discharged.
Finding of the Court :

Disputed Question of Fact :

In this writ petition the petitioner filed this writ petition
contending that she being the biological mother is entitled to
custody of the child in question. All the respondents
empathically stated in their respective affidavit- in-opposition
as well as argued that the child had been abandoned by his
biological parents. Mrs. Fawzia Karim, learned Advocate for
respondent Nos.7 and 8 also argued that no GD entry with
regard to the child in question has been filed by the petitioner
or her husband. This claim of the respondents has been denied
by the petitioner. This is certainly a question of fact. It is a
settled principle of law that disputed question of fact cannot be
decided in writ jurisdiction [Director, H.B.R.I vs Darus Salam
Co-Operative Society [2002 BLD (AD) 134 =54 DLR (AD)
111]
Maintainability of Writ Petition

Now let us examine the maintainability of this writ
petition.

In the case of Dr Ruqia Skhukat vs Additional District and
Sessions Judge [2003 CLC 1310] the High Court of Lahore
held :
“Interference in writ jurisdiction is not warranted
because the impugned orders were passed by Courts of
competent jurisdiction, it was within their exclusive
jurisdiction to believe or disbelieve evidence and
plausible reasons are given in the impugned order and
the judgment respectively passed by the Guardian Judge
and the learned Additional District Judge, in support of
conclusions arrived at.”
In the case of Abdul Razak vs. Ijaz Mahmood [1992
CLC 5] the High Court of Lahore held:
“Two Courts below have decided questions of pure
fact in lawful exercise of their exclusive
jurisdiction and, viewed from the above standards
set by the precedents, there does not exist any case
at all for interference being made by this Court in
its a Constitution power of writs.”

JOSE ANTONIO ZALVA DIEZ DEL CORRAL ALIAS
JOSE ANTONIO ZALVA filed a writ petition for habeas
corpus in relation to his minor children. The Supreme Court of
India dismissed the writ petition on the ground of
maintainability. While dealing with maintainability of habeas
corpus petition, the court examined various decisions of the
Supreme Court of India. Paragraphs 19 and 20 of the judgment
in TEJASWINI GAUD have been quoted. We would like to
reproduce the aforesaid paragraphs 19 and 20.
“19. Habeas corpus proceedings is not to justify or
examine the legality of the custody. Habeas corpus
proceedings is a medium through which the custody of
the child is addressed to the discretion of the Court.
Habeas corpus is a prerogative writ which is an
extraordinary remedy and the writ is issued where in the
circumstances of the particular case, ordinary remedy
provided by the law is either not available or is
ineffective; otherwise a writ will not be issued. In child
custody matters, the power of the High Court in granting
the writ is qualified only in cases where the detention of

a minor by a person who is not entitled to his legal
custody. In view of the pronouncement on the issue in
question by the Supreme Court and the High Courts, in
our view, in child custody matters, the writ of habeas
corpus is maintainable where it is proved that the
detention of a minor child by a parent or others was
illegal and without any authority of law.
20. In child custody matters, the ordinary remedy lies
only under the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act or
the Guardians and Wards Act as the case may be. In
cases arising out of the proceedings under the Guardians
and Wards Act, the jurisdiction of the court is
determined by whether the minor ordinarily resides
within the area on which the court exercises such
jurisdiction. There are significant differences between
the enquiry under the Guardians and Wards Act and the
exercise of powers by a writ court which is summary in
nature. What is important is the welfare of the child. In
the writ court, rights are determined only on the basis of
affidavits. Where the court is of the view that a detailed

enquiry is required, the court may decline to exercise the
extraordinary jurisdiction and direct the parties to
approach the civil court. It is only in exceptional cases,
the rights of the parties to the custody of the minor will
be determined in exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction on
a petition for habeas corpus.”

In that case the writ petition filed by the father was
dismissed on the ground of maintainability. However, the
Supreme Court of India made observation and direction that
parties may seek remedy before appropriate civil court.

In the case of Nirmala vs Kulwant Singh 1the father of a
minor child filed a writ petition in Punjab and Haryana High
Court. Punjab and Haryana High Court after hearing the parties
entertained the Habeas Corpus petition. Being aggrieved by the
judgment of Punjab and Haryana High Court the grandmother
of the child filed petition before the Supreme Court of India.
The Supreme Court of India set aside the judgment of the
Punjab and Haryana High Court. In this case also the Supreme
Court of India thoroughly examined various decisions of the

1 https://indiankanoon.org/doc/113464870

Supreme Court of India wherein has been consistently held that
in a summary proceeding court cannot go into the detail
question of fact because proceeding in a writ petition are
summary in nature and as such dismissed the writ petition on
the ground of maintainability.

In that case the Supreme Court of India held:
“We are of the considered view that in the peculiar facts
and circumstances of the case, the High Court ought not
to have entertained the habeas corpus petition under
article 226 of the Constitution of India. Since a detail
inquiry including the  welfare of the minor child and his
preference will have been involved, such an exercise
would be done only in a proceedings under the
provisions of the Guardians and Wards Act 1890.”
The child has been given custody by the Family Court.
There is forum of appeal under section 23 of the Family Courts
Act 2023. Since there is alternative remedy, this writ petition is
not maintainable. Moreover, this writ petition involves
disputed question of fact which are not amenable to writ
jurisdiction. [Director, H.B.R.I vs Darus Salam Co-Operative

Society [2002 BLD (AD) 134 =54 DLR (AD) 111]. In the case
of Abdul Hamid Khan vs. Miah Nurul Islam [42 DLR
(AD)49].

In the result, the Rule is discharged without any order as
to cost. However, the petitioner shall be at liberty to seek
remedy before the appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.

Interim order is recalled and vacated.
Transmit a copy of this judgment to the concerned
respondents at once.

           (Kazi Zinat Hoque, J:)
 I agree

         (Aynun Nahar Siddiqua, J)

A.K