In the Supreme Court of Bangladesh
(Civil Revisional Jurisdiction)
Present:
Mr. Justice Md. Riaz Uddin Khan

Civil Revision No. 4266 of 2015

IN THE MATTER OF :
An application under section 115(1) of the Code of
Civil Procedure
-And-
In the Matter of:
Md. Mizanur Rahman
        …Appellant-Petitioner

Versus
Mosammot Rasheda Khatun and another
...Defendant-Opposite parties
Mr. Md. Taufiqul Islam, Advocate with
Mr. Md. Masum Billah, Advocate
                                ... For the petitioner

Ms. Israt Jahan, Advocate with

Ms. Jobaida Parvin, Advocate

... For the Opposite Parties

Judgment on: 16.07.2026

Md. Riaz Uddin Khan, J:

At the instance of the defendant Rule was issued
calling upon the opposite parties to show cause as to why
the impugned judgment and decree dated 28.05.2015 passed by
the Joint District Judge, 1st Court, Kurigram in Family
Appeal No. 08 of 2014 affirming the judgment and decree
dated 17.04.2014 passed by the Senior Assistant Judge,
Family Court, Bhurungamari, Kurigram in Family Suit No. 63
of 2011 should not be set aside and/or such other or
further order or orders should not be passed as to this
Court may deem fit and proper.
At the time of issuance of Rule the judgment and
decree passed by the court of appeal below affirming the
judgment and decree passed by the Family Court was stayed

for a period of 06(six) months initially which was extended
time to time.
Facts for disposal of this Rule in a nutshell are
that the plaintiff-opposite parties filed Family Suit No.63
of 2011 before the Family Court Bhurungamari, Kurigram for
dower and maintenance contending inter alia that marriage
was solemnized between the defendant-petitioner and the
plaintiff No.1 on 03.08.2002 as per Muslim Law fixing a
dower of Tk-1,29,999/- and during their wedlock a daughter
(defendant No.2) was born. At one stage of their marriage
life the defendant drove away the plaintiff No. 1 from his
house with her minor daughter on 20.09.2011 asking her to
bring Tk-50,000/- from her father. In this regard plaintiff
No. 1 filed a criminal case against the defendant which was
ultimately set at rest with compromise. However, the
defendant again drove away her for which the plaintiff
filed the instant suit for maintenance and dower. The
defendant appeared before the trial court and filed written
statement denying all the material allegations made in the
plaint contending inter alia that the marriage was
solemnized between the parties on 03.08.2002 fixing the
dower as Tk-29,999/- and not Tk-1,29,999/-. However, as it
was impossible for both of them to continue their conjugal
life they agreed to dissolution of marriage and in this
regard a Khula talaq was held which was registered in the
Nika Registry Office and the plaintiff received Tk-31,000/-
including her dower and maintenance for iddat period. The
defendant further claimed that he was ready to pay
maintenance of defendant No.2, his daughter.
During trial both parties adduced witnesses and
produced some documents to prove their respective case.
After conclusion of trial the trial court decreed the suit
by the judgment and decree dated 17.04.2014 against which
the defendant filed Family Appeal No. 08 of 2014 before the
District Judge, Kurigram which was ultimately heard by the

Joint District Judge, Kurigram who after hearing the appeal
dismissed the same by the impugned judgment and decree
dated 28.05.2015 affirming the judgment and decree passed
by the trial court.
Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said
judgment and decree dated 28.05.2015 the defendant filed
the instant civil revision and obtained the Rule and order
of stay as stated at the very outset.
Mr. Md. Taufiqul Islam, the learned advocate
appearing for the petitioner submits that both the courts
below failed to appreciate the legal position that
according to Muslim Law the plaintiff cannot be entitled to
full dower without the dissolution of marriage. Both the
courts below concurrently found that the marriage was
subsisting but asked the defendant to pay the full dower as
such both the judgments are liable to be set aside.
The
learned
advocate
then
submits
that
nikahnama filed by the plaintiff shows that dower was fixed
at Tk-1,29,999/- and in the column-14 it is mentioned that
the muajjal (prompt) and Muajjol (deferred) at Tk-250/- and
in the next column, i.e column no.15 it is found that Tk250/- has already been paid. So, if the marriage is
subsisting then the plaintiff cannot claim the rest of the
amount which is deferred dower.
The
learned
advocate
next
submits
that
defendant filed the certified copy of his divorce paper
(khula talaq) which was registered in the nikah registry
and an official of the District Registrar deposed before
the court in support of the registration of divorce. Though
both the courts below disbelieved the documents produced by
the defendants but as per Muslim Law the talaq has been
executed from the date of knowledge of such talaq by the
wife. Since a compromise talaq (khula talaq) was executed
there was no need to give a notice under section 7(1) of
the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961. The learned

advocate finally submits that the talaq was executed and
the defendant No.1 is entitled he get the maintenance of
only the 3(three) months of her iddat period from her
knowledge of divorce.
On the other hand Ms. Israt Jahan, the learned
advocate appearing on behalf of the opposite parties
submits that the plaintiff by producing the original
nikahnama  before the court proved that dower money was
fixed at Tk-1,29,999/-. On the other hand the nikanama
filed by the defendant was a forged one which has been
proved by the nikah Registrar himself.
The learned advocate then submits that the divorce
has not been executed or came into effect as the provision
of Section 7 of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 was
not complied with. According to the learned advocate
provision of Section 7(1) of the Ordinance is mandatory
provision and in contravention of that mandatory provision
no talaq can be effected. The defendant could not prove the
so-called Khula talaq and both the courts disbelieved the
Khula talaq as claimed by the husband, hence, the marriage
is still subsisting. However, she conceded that as the
marriage is subsisting the defendant No.1, the wife, is not
entitled to the deferred dower but submits that as in the
nikahnama the prompt and deferred dower was not fixed, the
wife is entitled to entire dower as per section 10 of the
Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961.
I have heard the learned advocates for both the
parties, perused the revision application. I have also
examined the lower court records including the plaint,
written
statement,
depositions
both
parties
and
exhibited documents. I have also carefully examined the
judgments passed by the courts below.
During trial both parties produced certified copy
of the Nikahnama: The Nikahnama (exhibit-1) produced by the
plaintiff shows that the dower was fixed as Tk-129,999/-

while the Nikahnama produced by the defendant shows the
dower as Tk-29,999/. It appears from the judgment of the
trial court that the trial court did not believe the
Nikahnama filed by the defendant but believed the Nikahnama
filed by the plaintiff and fixed dower money as Tk1,29,999/-. The trial court further disbelieved the
documents filed by the defendant regarding the talaq-etoufiz observing that the khulanama produced by the
defendant in question is not reliable. The trial court
further observed that since there is no separate mentioning
of prompt and deferred dower in the Nikahnama (exhibit-1)
as such the entire dower should be treated as prompt one as
per section 10 of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961.
It appears from the judgment of the court of appeal
below that the appellate court concurrent with the findings
of the trial court regarding the fixation of dower as
contained in the Nikahnama filed by the plaintiff but the
appellate court differed with the finding of the trial
court in relation to following procedure of section 7 and 8
of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 that in case of
declaring talaq in the form Khula or Mubarat there is no
need to serve notice as provided under section 7(1) of the
Ordinance. However, the appellate court also disbelieved
the claim of Khula talaq as claimed by the defendant.
In the case of Hamira Bibi Vs. Zubaida Bibi
reported in (1916) 43 I.A. 294 Lord Parker of Waddington
observed:
Dower is an essential incident under the
Mussulman law to the status of marriage; to
such an extent this is so that when it is
unspecified at the time of marriage is
contracted the law declares that it must be
adjudged on definite principles. Regarded as
a consideration for the marriage, it, in
theory, payable before consummation; but the

law allows its division into two parts, one
of which is called ‘prompt’, payable before
the wife can be called upon to enter the
conjugal
domicil;
other
‘deferred’,
payable on the dissolution of the contract by
the death of either of the parties or by
divorce.
This definition of dower was acclaimed all over the
world where the Muslim law is applicable. It was also cited
in the case of Syed Sabir Husain Vs. Farzand Husan reported
in (1937) 65 I.A. 119. From the above celebrated decision
it is clear that prompt dower is payable immediately after
the marriage, if demanded by the wife; while the deferred
dower is payable on the dissolution of the marriage or on
the death of either party. But a difficulty arises when it
is not settled mentioning the amount of prompt and
deferred. In Hanafi law (applicable in the present case)
the whole of the dower may be promptly awarded in special
circumstances but in the absence of proof of custom, the
presumption is that one-half is prompt, and the other half
deferred, and portion may be changed to suit particular
cases. Usually the dower is fixed at the time of marriage
and the Kazi or Nikah Registrar enters the amount in the
register as well as in the Nikahnama or Kabinnama. In our
country there is a statutory Form of Nikahnama and in
Column No.13 is for mentioning the total amount of dower;
Column No.14 is for mentioning of prompt and deferred dower
while Column No.15 is for mentioning whether at the time of
marriage any part of the dower is paid or not. Section 10
of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 deals with mode
of payment of dower which reads as follows:
10. Dower- Where no details about the mode of
payment of dower are specified in the Nikah
nama, or the marriage contract, the entire

amount of the dower shall be presumed to be
payable on demand.
In the instant case there is admitted position by
both
parties
regarding
marriage
which
was
solemnized on 03.08.2002. The 1st dispute between the
parties is regarding the amount of dower. Since in the
Nikahnama (exhibit-1) produced by the plaintiff in Column
no.13 the total dower is mentioned as Tk-1,29,999/-. On
examination of that Nikahnama it appears from column No.14
wherein the prompt and deferred dower is mentioned as Tk250/- whereas in column No.15 it has been mentioned that
Tk-250/- has been paid through ornament. Since in the
column no.14 there is a mention of Tk-250/-, it should be
treated as prompt dower which has already been paid.
As per Hanafi school of Muslim Law the wife can
claim prompt dower at any time and as per Shia law the wife
can demand the full dower both prompt and deferred but as
per the school of Sunni all the Islamic jurists in a single
view opined that the deferred dower can only be claimed
through dissolution of marriage either by death or by talaq
or divorce. In this case the plaintiff claimed that the
marriage is still in subsistence hence she cannot claim the
entire dower money. It is true that as per section 10 of
the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance if there is no mention of
prompt and deferred dower the entire dower will be payable
on demand. We have already noticed that on examination of
exhibit-1, the Nikahnama it is found in Column No.14 prompt
dower was mentioned as Tk-250/- and as such the finding of
both the courts in this regard is not correct. In that view
of the case the plaintiff was not entitled to get the
entire dower money as per section 10 of the Muslim Family
Laws Ordinance, 1961.
Now on the question of divorce or talaq: whether
was effected as claimed by the defendant. The defendant
filed the copy of the divorce paper registered with a

different Nikah registry not where the marriage was
registered on the contention that a Khula talaq was held on
compromise in presence of both parties. Even it was neither
registered where the wife resides nor the husband himself.
Both the courts below did not believe that the khula talaq
was held between the parties as the plaintiff clearly
claimed in her plaint that her signature was obtained in
some blank papers and this averment was made, though by an
amendment, but it is before the filing of the written
statement, hence both the courts below rightly believed
that no khula talaq as claimed by the defendant was held.
Be that as it may, in traditional Muslim Law there
are different forms of talaq or dissolution of marriage
which has also been recognized by section 8 of the Muslim
Family Laws Ordinance, 1961. The legislature has described
a procedural law how to communicate the pronouncement of
any form of talaq by the husband to the wife and the
legislature also constituted authority namely arbitration
council for reconciliation between the parties regarding
the talaq. At this juncture it would be profitable if we
refer sections 7 and 8 of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance,
1961 which run as follows:
Section- 7.(1) Any man who wishes to divorce
his wife shall, as soon as may be after the
pronouncement
talaq
in
any
form
whatsoever, give the Chairman notice in
writing of his having done so, and shall
supply a copy thereof to the wife.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall be punishable with
simple imprisonment for term which may extend
to one year or with fine which may extend to
[ten thousand taka] or with both.
(3) Save as provided in sub-section (5), a
Talaq unless revoked earlier, expressly or

otherwise, shall not be effective until the
expiration of ninety days from the day on
which
notice
under
sub-section
(1)
is
delivered to the Chairman.
(4) Within thirty days of the receipt of
notice under sub-section (1), the Chairman
shall constitute an Arbitration Council for
purpose
bringing
about
a
reconciliation between the parties, and the
Arbitration Council shall take all steps
necessary to bring about such reconciliation.
(5) If the wife be pregnant at the time talaq
is pronounced, talaq shall not be effective
until the period mentioned in sub-section (3)
or the pregnancy, whichever be later, ends.
(6) Nothing shall debar a wife whose marriage
has been terminated by talaq effective under
this
section
from
remarrying
same
husband, without an intervening marriage with
a third-person, unless such termination is
for the third time so effective.
Section- 8. Where the right to divorce has
been duly delegated to the wife and she
wishes to exercise that right, or where any
of the parties to a marriage wishes to
dissolve the marriage otherwise than by
talaq, the provisions of section 7 shall,
mutatis mutandis and so far as applicable,
apply.
From plain reading of the above provisions it is
clear that as per section 7(1) after the pronouncement of
talaq, in any form, the husband has to give notice in
writing to the Chairman of such pronouncement and a copy of
the same shall supply to the wife.  The pronouncement of
talaq by the husband in contravention of section 7(1) it is

a punishable offence under section 7(2) of the Ordinance.
Talaq or divorced is a form of dissolution of marriage and
according to traditional Muslim Law husband can talaq or
divorce his wife at any time without assigning any reason
and the husband even can delegate his power of talaq to his
wife or any third person without diminishing his power of
pronouncement of talaq. The core question is whether there
was any intention of talaq: if the language is so clear or
unambiguous then the intention need not be proved but if
the language is vague then it is to be proved that there
was intention of talaq. However, after coming into force of
the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance, 1961 any law, custom or
usage have been made subject to this Ordinance according to
section 3 which inter alia declares that the provisions of
the Ordinance would have effect, “notwithstanding any law,
custom or usage”. According to section 7(3) of the
Ordinance a talaq shall not be effective until the
expiration of ninety days from the day on which notice
under subsection (1) is delivered to the Chairman. In the
case of Syed Ali Newaz Gardezi Vs. Lt. Col. Muhammad Yousus
reported in 15 DLR (SC) 9 it was observed:
“… it is obvious that the object of section 7
is to prevent hasty dissolution of marriage by
talaq, pronounced by the husband, unilaterally,
without an attempt being made to prevent
disruption of the matrimonial status. If the
husband
himself
thinks
better
pronouncement of talaq and abstain from giving
a notice to the chairman, he should perhaps be
deemed in view of section 7, to have revoked
the pronouncement and that would be to the
advantage of the wife. Subsection (3) of this
section
precludes
talaq
from
being
effective as such, for a certain period and
within that period, consequently, it could not

be said that the marital status of the parties
had in any way be changed. They would still in
law continue to be husband and wife.”
From the above observation there is no doubt that
serving notice upon the Chairman with a copy to the wife
under section 7(1) read with 7(2) and 7(3) is a mandatory
provision in pronouncing any form of talaq except the other
form of dissolution of marriage other than talaq as
mentioned in section 8 of the Ordinance. In the case of Md.
Serajul Islam Vs. Most. Helana Begum and others reported in
1999 BLT (AD) 850 wherein our Supreme Court, Appellate
Division held-
 “… Section 7(1) of the Ordinance provides for
giving of notice of talaq to the Chairman and
the copy thereof to the wife and provides for
punishment
for
contravention
and
this
law
overrides any other provision of any other law.
But there being clear intention to divorce by
the affidavit on the part of the petitioner and
the same having been disclosed and produced
before
lower
appellate
Court
by
petitioner himself, the petitioner cannot take
advantage of his own wrong and cannot claim the
benefit of non-service of notice by him to the
Chairman. He is bound by his admission.”
In my view, our apex Court made the above
observation keeping in mind ‘that would be to the advantage
of the wife’ in the given facts and circumstances of that
particular case. In the present case the defendantpetitioner husband claimed that marriage was dissolved
through Khula talaq but both the courts below concurrently
disbelieved it. On examination of that certificate of Khula
talaq along with depositions of DWs I also do not find any
reason to set aside those findings of courts below on this
fact as the petitioner failed to prove the khula talaq.

In that view of the matter, the marriage between the
plaintiff no.1 and the defendant cannot be said to be
dissolved through talaq. The plaintiff no.1 and the
defendant is still in law continue to be husband and wife
unless the marriage is dissolved in accordance with law.
In the facts and circumstances and the position of
law as discussed above the judgments and decrees passed by
the courts below are partially incorrect so far it relates
to payment of dower but is correct so far it relates to
talaq. For the reasons stated above I am constrained to
interfere with the impugned judgments and decrees passed by
the courts below.
In the result the Rule is made absolute-in-part.
There will be no order as to cost.
The plaintiff no.1, wife is not entitled to
deferred dower money as the marriage has not been dissolved
in accordance with law, and prompt dower of Tk-250/- has
already been paid. Both the plaintiffs are entitled to
their maintenance as decreed by the trial court.
Send down the lower court records along with a copy
of this judgment.

Ziaul Karim
Bench Officer