In the Supreme Court of Bangladesh
(Civil Revisional Jurisdiction)

Present:
Mr. Justice Md. Riaz Uddin Khan

Civil Revision No. 163 of 2007

IN THE MATTER OF :
An application under section 115(1) of the Code of
Civil Procedure
-And-
In the Matter of:
Nasiruddin Mollah and others
        … Pre-emptee-Petitioners

-Versus-
Motaleb Mollah and others
...Pre-emptor -Opposite Parties
None
                                              … For the petitioners
Mr. Zahirul Alam Babar, Advocate
… For the Opposite Party No.1

Judgment on: 19.05.2026

Md. Riaz Uddin Khan, J-

At the instance of the pre-emptees this Rule
was issued calling upon the preemptor-opposite party
No.1 to show cause as to why the impugned judgment and
order dated 17.08.2006 passed by the Joint District
Judge, 2nd Court, Gopalganj in Miscellaneous Appeal
No.03 of 2005 reversing the judgment and order dated
16.01.2005 passed by the Senior Assistant Judge,
Tungipara, Gopalganj in Miscellaneous Case No.04 of
2002 rejecting the application for pre-emption should
not be set aside and/or or such other or further order
or orders should not be passed as to this Court may
deem fit and proper.
At the time of issuance of Rule the operation
of the impugned judgment and order passed by the Joint

District Judge, 2nd Court, Gopalganj was stayed for a
period of 06(six) months which was later extended till
disposal of the Rule.
Facts in a nutshell for disposal of this Rule
are that the opposite party No.1 as pre-emptor filed
miscellaneous case No.04 of 2002 under section 96 of
the State Acquisition and Tenancy Act, 1950 before the
court of Senior Assistant Judge, Tungipara, Gopalganj
against the present petitioners and others contending
inter alia that that the preemptor and his step sister
Fakitonnesa, mother of the pre-emptee-seller inherited
the case land jointly and in the last survey the case
land was recorded in the D.P Khatian Nos. 860, 59,
1756, 1755 and 858 correctly in their names. After the
death of Fakitonnesa, the preemptee-seller Majeda Begum
inherited a portion of share of deceased Fakitonnesa.
Though the case property was recorded in the name of
his step sister Fakitonnesa but in fact the case land
had been possessing by the pre-emptor and the case land
was never possessed by Fakitonnesa or her daughter
Majeda Begum. Majeda Begum without serving any notice
to the pre-emptor sold the case land measuring 26
decimals by a registered Kabala Deed being No.1304
dated 16.10.1996 to the Pre-emptees (Petitioner Nos.1-4
herein) who are the strangers in the suit holding. They
neither disclosed about their purchase nor went on
possession of the case land and for the first time on
25.01.2002 the outsider purchasers (petitioner Nos.1-4)
disclosed as to purchase of the case land in presence
of Awal Mollah, Zafor Mollah, Harun Mollah and Hachen
Mollah from whom the preemptor on that date came to
know about such sale of the case land. Had the Pre-

emptor knew about the sale of the case land earlier, he
would purchase the same, hence the case.
The preemptee-petitioner Nos.1-4 contested the
case by filing a written objection denying all the
material allegations contending inter alia that the
case is barred by limitation and bad for defect of
parties. The preemptor and the Pre-emptee Nos.1-4 had
been living in the same homestead at side by side. The
preemptor was the maternal uncle of Majeda Begum, the
preemptee-seller. The mother of the seller, Fakitonnesa
used to cultivate her portion of the case land by her
son Awal and Harun and after the death of Fakitonnesa
they used to possess the same on behalf of Majeda
Begum. The vendor Majeda Begum at first requested the
preemptor to purchase the case land but he refused to
purchase the same for want of money and the preemptor
negotiated the Pre-emptee-Purchasers to purchase the
same and settled consideration money also. The Preemptees purchased the case property on 16.10.1996 vide
Deed No.1394 and took possession through the Pre-emptor
and therefore the claim of the Pre-emptor-Opposite
Party No.1 for pre-emption right in respect of case
land was not maintainable and liable to be rejected.
The
Senior
Assistant
Judge,
Tungipara,
Gopalganj was pleased to frame as many as 5 issues to
determine the case. During trial the Pre-emptor
examined as many as 3 witnesses and the Pre-empteePurchasers also examined 3 witnesses in support of
their case. The Senior Assistant Judge after conclusion
of trial dismissed the case by his Judgment and Order
dated 16.01.2004. Against the said judgment and order
the pre-emptor being appellant preferred Miscellaneous

Appeal No.03 of 2005 in the Court of District Judge,
Gopalganj which was ultimately transferred to the Joint
District Judge, Second Court, Gopalganj for disposal
and the court of appeal below after hearing the appeal
allowed the same by its Judgment and Order dated
17.08.2006 and thereby reversed the judgment and order
passed by the trial court.
Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the
said judgment and order dated 17.08.2006 the pre-emptee
purchasers preferred the instant civil revision before
this Court and obtained the Rule and order of stay as
stated at the very outset.
No one appears for the petitioners to press the
Rule though it was appearing in the list with names of
the advocates for more than 4 months.
Mr. Zahirul Alam Babar, the learned advocate
appearing for the preemptor-opposite party No.1 submits
that the trial court without considering the evidence
on record dismissed the pre-emption case on misreading
and non consideration of evidence on record. On the
other hand the court of appeal below after considering
all aspect of the case elaborately discussing the
depositions of all the PTWs and OPWs and other evidence
on record allowed the pre-emption case. From the
depositions it is crystal clear that the pre-emptor was
in possession of the suit land and though the disputed
sale has been occurred 06(six) years ago before filing
of the instant pre-emption case but the pre-emptee
purchasers never went for possession of the suit land.
The full brother of the pre-emptee seller deposed in
the court in favour of the pre-emptor saying that the
pre-emptor was in possession of the suit land. All the

PTWs unequivocally stated that they heard for the 1st
time on 25th January 2002 corresponding to 2nd j¡O in
front of a shop from the purchaser pre-emptee that the
suit land was sold out. Even if for sake of argument,
the PTW-2 Awal Mollah knew about the disputed sale
after two years that does not necessarily mean that the
preemptor also knew it at that time. Mr. Babar submits
that the trial court on misconception on law and facts
rejected the pre-emption case on the ground of
limitation but the appellate court below rightly held
that the case was not barred by limitation.
I have heard the learned advocate for the
opposite party No.1, perused the revision petition. I
have also examined the lower court records including
the
pre-emption
petition,
written
objection,
depositions of both parties and exhibited documents. I
have carefully examined both the judgments and orders
passed by the courts below.
It appears from the judgment of the trial court
that it rejected the pre-emption case on the ground of
limitation on the finding that it is presumable that
the pre-emptor was in the knowledge of the sale within
2(two) years of the sale as PTW-2, Awal Mollah in his
cross examination admitted that he knew it two years
after the date of Kabala. On the other hand the
appellate
court
below
discussed
elaborately
the
depositions of all the PTWs and OPWs and came to the
conclusion that the case is not barred by limitation.
There is no dispute that the preemptor is the co-sharer
of the case land and the purchasers are strangers in
the case holding. Both the courts below held that the
case is not bad for defect of parties or barred by the

principles of estoppel, waiver and acquiescence. The
only point before this Court is whether the case was
barred by limitation or not, on which the trial court’s
finding was reversed by the appellate court below. The
preemptor examined himself as PTW-1 who stated that on
25.01.2002 for the first time he came to know about the
disputed sale from Awal Mollah and others. He further
stated that he was in possession of the case land and
the purchasers never went to possession. These versions
of depositions were supported by PTWs-2 and 3: both of
them stated that they were informed about the disputed
sale by the purchaser on 25.01.2002 and on that date
they disclosed it to the preemptor. The preemptees
claimed that the seller possessed the case land through
her brother Awal Mollah but this Awal Mollah as PTW-2
categorically stated in his deposition that the seller
or purchasers never went to possession rather the
preemptor was all through in possession of the case
land. It is the clear case of the pre-emptor that he
could know about the sale of the disputed land on 25th
January 2002 from Awal Mollah, Zafor Mollah, Harun
Mollah and Hachen Mollah who could know from the
purchaser
Nasir
Mollah
and
this
deposition
was
supported by PTW-2 Md. Awal Molla who is the full
brother of the pre-emptee seller. This deposition was
also supported by PTW-3 Hachen Mollah. On the other
hand OPWs could not prove that after purchase the preemptee-purchasers went for possession of the suit land
rather the OPWs gave contradictory statements regarding
the date of possession of the pre-emptee purchasers.
The court of appeal below elaborately discussing the
evidence on record rightly came to the conclusion that

the case was not barred by limitation and allowed the
preemption case.
Considering all the aspect of the case as
discussed above I am of the view that the pre-emptor
has successfully proved his case. In that view of the
matter, I do not find any reason to interfere with the
judgment and order passed by the learned Joint District
Judge and as there is no merit the Rule is liable to be
discharged.
In the result the Rule is discharged. The order
of stay granted earlier by this Court stands vacated.
Send down the lower court records along with a
copy of this judgment at once.

Ziaul Karim
Bench Officer