IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(CIVIL REVISIONAL JURISDICTION)

Single Bench:
       Mr Justice Abdur Rahman

    Civil Revision No. 2326 of 2021

In the matter of:

Shahe Alam Kazi and others
        ......Plaintiffs-Respondents
Petitioners
-Versus-
Shahe Alam and others
 ...Defendants-Appellants
  Opposite parties

 Mrs Zubaida Gulshan Ara, Advocate
                                     ....For the Petitioners

Mr Md. Asadur Rahman, with
Mr Md. Ashikur Rahman, Advocate

...For the opposite parties

Date of Hearing: 5.7.2026, 20.7.2026 and
21.7.2026 A.D.
               Date of Judgment: 02.08.2026 A.D., Sunday;
18 kÖveY, 1433 e½vã|

JUDGMENT:
Abdur Rahman, J:
This revisional application, at the instance of the
petitioners, has been filed under section 115(1) of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908. At the time of issuance of the Rule, the
following order was passed:
" Let a Rule be issued calling upon the opposite party
Nos. 1-48 to show cause as to why the judgment and
decree dated 18.10.2021 (decree signed on 24.10.2021)
passed by the learned Additional District Judge,
Charfassion, Bhola in Title Appeal No. 13 of 2017
allowing the appeal and thereby reversing the judgment
and decree dated 30.11.2016 (decree signed on
01.12.2016) passed by the learned Joint District Judge,
2nd Court, Charfassion, Bhola in Title Suit No. 51 of 2015
decreeing the suit in part should not be set aside and/or
such other or further order or orders passed as to this
Court may seem fit and proper.”
Concomitantly, this Court was also pleased to call for
the records and stay the operation of the impugned judgment
and decree for a period of 06(six) months from date.

Subsequently, the petitioner filed an application for an
injunction, and after hearing, this Court was pleased to allow
the said application with a direction upon both parties to
maintain status quo in respect of possession and position of
the suit property till disposal of the Rule.
The nucleus of the facts of the instant Rule is that the
plaintiff instituted Title Suit No. 195 of 1998, subsequently
renumbered as Title Suit No. 51 of 2015, against the
defendants seeking partition of the ejmali property,
declaration of title, and a declaration that the registered
Deeds dated 04.03.1948, being Nos. 1291 and 1292, are not
binding upon the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs' claims rested upon
the fact that the suit property originally belonged to Rashik
Chandra, measuring 19.69 acres, of which he sold 14.33 acres
to Sreeram Chandra Talukdar, while the rest land remained
with him, subject to a subsequent deduction for a
Government Road. After Rashik Chandra's death, his alleged
sole son, Jatindra Chandra (defendant No.14), succeeded to
remaining
property.
Sreeram
Chandra thereafter
transferred portions of the land to the plaintiffs' predecessors,

and the plaintiffs and their predecessors subsequently
acquired additional portions by purchase and inheritance,
thereby becoming owners of an aggregate of 9.04 acres. The
plaintiffs further allege that, taking advantage of an erroneous
R.S. record-of-rights, the defendants claimed title through one
Dhonenjoy and attempted to dispossess them, giving rise to
the suit.
Conversely, defendant Nos. 1–13, 15 and 35–37
contested the suit by filing written statements. Their case, in
substance, is that the property originally belonged to Rashik
Chandra and was subsequently recorded in R.S. Khatian No.
286 in the names of Rashik Chandra, Tofazzol Hossain, Moktar
Hossain, Jalal Ahmed, Samsul Haque, Motahar Hossain,
Nezamul Haque and Dhonenjoy in their respective shares.
According to the defendants, Dhonenjoy owned 2.56 acres,
which he transferred to Nurullah, Ojiullah, and Sanaullah, and
the S.A. record was accordingly prepared in their names. The
defendants claim possession through successive transfers and
the present record of rights, having erected homesteads and
planted trees on the suit land. They further contend that

Rashik Chandra had no son named Jatindra Chandra and,
therefore, the alleged transfer or claim founded upon Jatindra
Chandra is fictitious and unenforceable. On these grounds,
they prayed for dismissal of the suit.
Thereafter, upon completion of all requisite legal
formalities, the learned trial Court concluded the trial and, by
its judgment and decree dated 30.11.2016, decreed the suit in
part in respect of 8.60 acres of land. Being aggrieved and
dissatisfied with the said judgment and decree, the contesting
defendants preferred Title Appeal No. 13 of 2017 before the
learned District Judge, Bhola, who subsequently transferred
the appeal to the learned Additional District Judge, CharFasson, Bhola, for hearing and disposal.
Upon hearing the parties and perusing the materials on
record, the learned Additional District Judge was pleased to
allow the appeal by his judgment and decree dated
18.10.2021, thereby reversing the judgment and decree of the
learned trial Court. Aggrieved and dissatisfied with the said
judgment and decree of the learned appellate Court, the

plaintiffs have invoked the revisional jurisdiction of this
Court.

Mrs Zubaida Gulshan Ara, learned Counsel appearing on
behalf of the petitioners submitted that the learned trial Court
after analyzing all the evidences on record decreeing the suit
in preliminary form giving specific shaham to the plaintiffs,
thus the learned appellate Court, without considering the case
in its truest perspective and without controverting the
reasons given by the learned trial Court allowed the appeal
which cannot be sustain in law.
Learned Counsel further submitted that the plaintiffs
prayed for dispense with the liability of integration which was
allowed by the trial Court and the defendant did not take any
legal steps against said decisions and further question of
defect of parties cannot arise at all, thus the learned appellate
Court without considering the said aspect found the suit is
barred defect of parties, and such kind of non-consideration
of evidence and thereby committed an error of law resulting
in an error in the decision occasioning failure of justice.

Learned Counsel further submitted that in the 'Ka'
schedule of the plaint the entire land of C.S. Khatian No. 706
has been mentioned as 14.33 acres and out of the aforesaid
land 1.69 acres land has been acquired for public road by the
government and hence the schedule 'Ka' mentioned 12.70
acres rest land out of which the plaintiffs claimed 9.04 acres of
land and as such there is no question in respect of hotspots is
maintained but the learned appellate Court without
considering the aforesaid aspect found that the suit is bed for
hotchpots and thereby committed an error of law resulting in
an error in the decision occasioning failure of justice.
Learned Counsel has further posited that the possession
of the parties is immaterial of partition suit and as such only
considering the possession of defendants and report of
Advocate Commissioner should not be considered as basis of
Saham in favour of any party and hence the finding of the
appellate Court i.e., “উেিখত কিমশন িতেবদন এবং সংি কাগজপ
দশন-1 এবং 11 িসিরজ পযােলাচনায় দখা যায় য, নািলশী স ি!র "# দখল মূলত
িববাদী আপীলকারী পে&র অনুকূেল মেম িতেবদন আিসয়ােছ। িক+ িব, িবচািরক
সই কিমশন িতেবদন িবষেয় মােটও আেলাচনা কেরন নাই।", which is
absolutely based on wrong interpretation of law and hence

the judgment of the learned appellate Court cannot be sustain
in law.
Learned Counsel has further submitted that title deed of
the defendants dated 18.3.1942 executed by Jitendra Lal and
Shoilobala in favour of Dhonenjoy Das being deed no.244
does not include the land of C.S. khatian no.706
corresponding to R.S. khatian No.286 and hence the aforesaid
transferred deed of prior owner to defendants namely
Dhonenjoy should not be considered as the basis of claiming
suit land and the appellate Court being misconceive about the
said deed allowed the appeal which cannot be sustain in law.

Conversely, Mr Md. Asadur Rahman, the learned
Counsel appearing on behalf of the opposite parties,
submitted that the learned trial Court misconceived the facts
and the proposition of law in decreeing the suit, whereas the
learned appellate Court, after due analysis of the evidence on
record, allowed the appeal, which cannot be interfered with
by this revisional jurisdiction.

Learned Counsel further submitted that the suit is
seriously barred for defects of parties as one of the main
parties, that is, the District Board, was a main party to the
instant suit and the total land of C.S Khatian was not brought
to the suit and as such the learned appellate Court rightly
found that the suit of the plaintiff was not maintainable.
Learned Counsel further submitted that subsequently
R.S record was rightly published in the name of Dhonenjoy,
who transferred the 2.56 acres of land to Nurullah, Ojiullah
and Sanaullah, and S.A record has been prepared in their
names, and the defendants are now in possession of the suit
property by record of rights and erecting homestead as well
as planting trees there to.
Learned Counsel finally referred to the decisions as
contained in 15 MLR (AD) 17 in respect of the cardinal
principle of law that the plaintiff has to prove his case with
cogent evidence, and he cannot rely on the weakness of the
defendants' case. The other decisions, as reported in 51 DLR
(AD) 155, are in respect of the hotchpotch of the partition
suit.

Having heard the learned Counsels appearing for the
respective parties, perused the revisional application, the
impugned judgment and decree, the judgments of the
Subordinate Courts, the pleadings, the oral and documentary
evidence available on record and the other materials annexed
to the revisional application, this Court is called upon to
determine whether the learned Appellate Court, in reversing
the judgment and preliminary decree passed by the learned
Trial Court, correctly appreciated the evidence and applied
the governing principles of law.
At the outset, it appears from the record that the
original owner, namely, Rashik Chandra, was admittedly the
owner of a total area of 14.33 acres comprised in C.S. Khatian
No. 706. The extent of the jote, namely, 14.33 acres, is not
seriously disputed by either side. The controversy, therefore,
principally relates to the derivation of title to the disputed
portion, the legal effect of the subsequent transactions, the
evidentiary value of the respective records-of-rights, the
parties' possession, and, further, the effect of the alleged noninclusion of the entire joint property in the hotchpot.

On careful perusal of the judgment of the learned Trial
Court, it appears that the said Court did not decree the suit
mechanically or merely on the basis of the documentary
record. Rather, the learned Trial Court carefully considered
the oral testimony adduced by both sides.
It is evident that PW-1, Shah Alam Kazi, fully supported
the material averments made in the plaint and his testimony
was found by the learned Trial Court to be consistent with the
plaintiff's pleaded case. PW-2, Abul Hossain Mridha, was a
particularly material witness. He stated that he knew both the
plaintiffs and the defendants and that the total area of the
land was 14.33 acres, whereas the plaintiffs' claim related to
9.04 acres. More importantly, in cross-examination he stated
that he was engaged in agricultural activities and cultivated
the suit land as a bargadar. He further stated that, apart from
the four plaintiffs, no other person was in possession of or
cultivating the suit land.
The significance of PW-2's testimony cannot be
overlooked. He was not a stranger to the land or a witness

merely speaking from hearsay. His evidence was based upon
his
asserted
personal
knowledge
of
cultivation
and
possession. The defendants had every opportunity to test his
credibility through cross-examination. Yet, nothing material
was elicited from his cross-examination which substantially
undermined his testimony or established the defendants'
asserted possession.
Equally significant is the fact that no suggestion was put
to PW-2 that he was inimical towards the defendants, that he
was interested in the plaintiffs, or that he had any other
reason to falsely depose against the defendants. Although the
mere absence of such a suggestion is not, by itself, conclusive
proof of credibility, such omission is nevertheless a relevant
circumstance when the Court is assessing whether the
witness's testimony has been effectively impeached or
materially shaken.
Similarly, PW-3, Shamsul Haque Majhi, stated in his
examination-in-chief that the suit land measuring 9.04 acres
was in the possession and enjoyment of Shah Alam and
others. His testimony is particularly significant because it

directly supports the plaintiffs' assertion of possession. More
importantly, PW-3 was not cross-examined at all on behalf of
the defendants. Consequently, the material assertions
contained in his testimony remained wholly unchallenged.
It is a settled principle of appreciation of evidence that
where a witness makes a material assertion on a particular
issue and the adverse party, having full opportunity, does not
cross-examine the witness on that material aspect, the Court
may legitimately take such omission into consideration in
determining whether the assertion has remained unrebutted.
It does not mean that an unchallenged statement
automatically becomes conclusive proof; nevertheless, where
such testimony is otherwise consistent with the pleadings and
surrounding documentary evidence, the absence of crossexamination assumes considerable evidentiary significance.
The learned Trial Court, therefore, cannot be said to
have acted perversely in relying upon the evidence of PW-2
and PW-3, particularly when their evidence remained
materially unshaken and no convincing evidence was brought
on record to establish that the plaintiffs had been

dispossessed or that the defendants were in actual possession
of the disputed land.
The principal reasoning of the learned Trial Court was
that the defendants claimed through Dhananjay Das on the
basis of Patta Deeds Nos. 1291 and 1292 dated 04.03.1948,
whereas the defendants had not adequately explained the
source of Dhananjay's title to the disputed property.
Ordinarily, a party claiming title through a predecessor
must establish a legally recognizable chain of title leading
from the admitted or established owner to the claimant. A
person cannot ordinarily convey a better title than he himself
possesses, subject to the recognized exceptions under the
law. Therefore, where the title of the predecessor is
specifically challenged, it becomes incumbent upon the
claimant to establish the root or lawful source of that
predecessor's title. In this context, it is imperative to admit
that a person cannot give anything beyond his interest.
The learned Trial Court observed that Dhananjay was
not the recorded owner in the C.S. record and that the

defendants had not, according to the evidence then before
that Court, satisfactorily demonstrated how Dhananjay
acquired title from Rashik Chandra, the recorded C.S. owner.
However, the learned Appellate Court brought on
record and relied upon registered Deed No. 244, whereby
Dhananjay Das was allegedly a purchaser from Jitendra Lal
Sarkar, son of Rashik Chandra, and Shailabala Sarkar, wife of
Rashik Chandra. According to the said deed, 3.79 acres of land
from C.S. Khatian No. 706 were transferred in favour of
Dhananjay.
This document is of considerable legal significance. Once
a registered deed tracing Dhananjay's acquisition to persons
claiming
through
Rashik
Chandra
is
brought
into
consideration, the reasoning of the learned Trial Court that
there was absolutely no documentary basis for Dhananjay's
subsequent claim cannot be sustained in its unqualified form
without examining the legal effect, extent, identity and
applicability of that deed to the suit land.

The revisional Court must, therefore, distinguish
between two propositions. First, the existence of Deed No.
244 furnishes a prima facie documentary link between
Dhananjay and persons claiming through the admitted C.S.
owner. Secondly, the existence of that deed does not, by
itself, conclusively establish that the entire suit land claimed
by the defendants falls within the land validly conveyed by
that deed. The identity and correspondence of the land
covered by Deed No. 244 with the land presently in dispute
must still be established by the evidence on record.
This distinction is crucial.
A registered instrument is not a talisman which
automatically establishes title to every parcel mentioned or
claimed under it. At the same time, a Court cannot disregard
such a registered instrument merely because the transferee
was not the original C.S. recorded tenant, particularly where
the deed itself purports to trace the transferee's title to
persons claiming through the original recorded owner.

However, the record further indicates that Rashik
Chandra had previously transferred 9.08 acres out of the total
14.33 acres to Ram Chandra by Deed No. 2216 dated
18.04.1941. The subsequent transaction in favour of
Dhananjay was for 3.79 acres vide deed 244 dated
04.03.1942.
This
chronological
sequence
assumes
substantial
importance. The earlier deed in favour of Ram Chandra
necessarily requires examination before determining the
extent of the property which remained available to Rashik
Chandra's successors for subsequent transfer.
Be that as it may, if Rashik Chandra had already
conveyed 9.08 acres out of 14.33 acres, the remaining
interest, subject to the precise identification of the land and
the terms of the earlier conveyance, would require careful
examination. Thereafter, the Court must determine whether
the 3.79 acres covered by Deed No. 244 formed part of the
remaining interest of Rashik Chandra and whether the
vendors under that deed possessed the requisite transferable
interest.

The subsequent sale deeds executed by Ram Chandra,
namely Deed Nos. 971, 972 and 973 dated 20.04.1942, are
also relevant for determining the ultimate disposition of the
property originally covered by the earlier transaction. Thus,
the title dispute cannot properly be resolved by looking at
Deed No. 244 in isolation. The entire chain of transactions has
to be considered cumulatively.
The fundamental principle is that title must be
determined by examining the continuity, legality and extent
of the chain of title, rather than by relying exclusively upon
one isolated khatian or one isolated deed.
However, the learned Trial Court attached considerable
importance to C.S. Khatian No. 706, wherein Rashik Chandra
was recorded as owner of 14.33 acres. As per the provisions of
Section 103(5) of the Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885, such an entry,
being an old record-of-rights, carries evidentiary value and
gives rise to the statutory presumption attached to a properly
prepared record-of-rights, subject to rebuttal in accordance
with law.

At the same time, the subsequent R.S. and S.A. records
cannot simply be brushed aside. A subsequent record-ofrights may constitute relevant evidence concerning possession
and the state of the record at the time of its preparation.
However, it is equally well settled that a record-of-rights does
not, by itself, create title where the person in whose favour
the entry stands has no lawful source of title.
Thus, neither side is entitled to rely upon a khatian as
though it were, by itself, the source of title. The correct
approach is to examine the record of rights together with the
deeds, succession, possession, surrounding circumstances,
and the chain of title. If the defendants' R.S. and S.A. entries
are supported by an antecedent lawful conveyance, those
entries acquire greater evidentiary significance. Conversely, if
no lawful title is established in the predecessor, the
subsequent entries cannot independently cure the defect in
the root of title.
In the present case, the learned Appellate Court
correctly noticed the existence of Deed No. 244 but, in my
considered view, did not sufficiently undertake the further

exercise of determining whether the 3.79 acres covered by
that deed corresponded with the disputed land claimed by the
defendants and whether the subsequent Patta Deeds Nos.
1291 and 1292 were legally traceable to that acquisition.
The defendants relied principally upon Patta Deeds Nos.
1291 and 1292 dated 04.03.1948. The legal efficacy of those
deeds necessarily depends upon the title and authority of the
person who executed them.
A transferee claiming through a deed must establish not
merely the execution of the deed but also the transferor's
subsisting interest in the property conveyed. The maxim nemo
dat quod non habet embodies the basic principle that a
person ordinarily cannot transfer a better title than he himself
possesses.
Therefore, the Patta Deeds could not be treated as
conclusive proof of the defendants' title merely because they
were executed in their favour. The Court was required to
trace the title of Dhananjay and determine whether the land

covered by the Patta Deeds formed part of the property
validly acquired by him.
The registered Deed No. 244 assumes relevance
precisely for this reason. It supplies a potential root of title
which was not considered by the learned Trial Court.
However, whether that root ultimately establishes the
defendants' title over the entire disputed 9.04 acres is a
separate question requiring evidence and identification of the
land.
However, the learned Appellate Court also relied upon
the Commission Report and observed that the Commissioner
did not establish title and possession in favour of the
defendants.
In this regard, it must be remembered that an Advocate
Commissioner appointed for local investigation ordinarily
assists
Court
in
elucidating
physical
features,
identification, measurement, boundaries, location, possession
or other matters falling within the scope of the commission. A
Commissioner is not ordinarily the adjudicator of title. The

ultimate determination of title remains exclusively within the
province of the Court.
Therefore, the fact that the Commission Report did not
itself establish title in favour of either party cannot, standing
alone, be treated as a defect in the plaintiffs' case. Equally, the
Report may nevertheless be highly relevant if it identifies the
suit
land,
boundaries,
road,
physical
features
and
correspondence between the land described in the deeds and
the land found upon local investigation.
The record indicates that the Commissioner identified
an area of approximately 1.80 decimals relating to the road
and that the road had been constructed during the relevant
period of R.S. survey operation. Such factual findings may
have significance in determining the identity and extent of the
land, but they do not, by themselves, determine title.
The learned Appellate Court was therefore required to
examine the Commission Report in its proper evidentiary
context rather than treating it as either a title deed or an
adjudication of ownership.

However, possession is undoubtedly an important
evidentiary circumstance in a civil suit concerning immovable
property. Where title is in dispute, evidence of long,
continuous and exclusive possession may constitute a relevant
circumstance in determining the probabilities arising from the
competing claims.
In the instant case, PW-2 stated that he cultivated the
suit land as a bargadar and that, apart from the plaintiffs, no
other persons were in possession or cultivation thereof. PW-3
also supported the plaintiffs' possession. The defendants did
not materially challenge these assertions.
The learned Appellate Court, while reversing the Trial
Court, therefore ought to have dealt specifically with these
uncontroverted or materially unshaken pieces of evidence and
assigned cogent reasons for rejecting them.
An appellate Court undoubtedly has jurisdiction to
reappraise the evidence and reach a different conclusion. But
such jurisdiction must be exercised judicially. Where the Trial
Court has relied upon material oral and documentary

evidence, an appellate Court reversing such findings is
ordinarily expected to demonstrate why the evidence relied
upon by the Trial Court is legally or factually insufficient.
A reversal without addressing the material reasoning of
the Trial Court may amount to failure to exercise appellate
jurisdiction in accordance with law.
The appellate Court is the final Court of fact. It is
therefore under a legal obligation to consider the evidence
independently, address the material findings of the Trial
Court, determine the issues arising from the pleadings and
give reasons for accepting or rejecting the evidence.
The appellate power to reverse a judgment is
undoubtedly broad, but it is not arbitrary. The appellate Court
must demonstrate a rational nexus between the evidence
relied upon and the conclusion reached.
In the present case, the learned Appellate Court placed
substantial reliance upon Deed No. 244 dated 18.03.1942 [the
record also refers to the date as 04.03.1942 in one place] but
did not sufficiently reconcile that deed with the earlier Deed

No. 2216 dated 18.04.1941 whereby Rashik Chandra had
allegedly transferred 9.08 acres out of 14.33 acres to Ram
Chandra.
The chronological relationship between these transactions
was fundamental to determining title. The appellate judgment
was required to address, inter alia:
i. what exact land was transferred by Deed No. 2216;
ii. what land remained with Rashik Chandra thereafter;
iii. whether the 3.79 acres covered by Deed No. 244
formed part of such remaining land;
iv. whether Jitendra Lal Sarkar and Shailabala Sarkar had
the requisite title and authority to execute Deed No.
244;
v. whether the 3.79 acres corresponded with the
disputed property;
vi. whether the subsequent Patta Deeds Nos. 1291 and
1292 related to the same land; and
vii. whether the R.S. and S.A. entries were supported by
the aforesaid chain of title.

Without answering these questions, the mere existence of
Deed No. 244 could not conclusively establish the defendants'
title to the suit property.
However, the proposition that an earlier registered deed is
necessarily conclusive against a subsequent deed or record
requires some qualification. Registration gives a registered
instrument substantial evidentiary significance and establishes
that the document was presented and registered in
accordance with law. It does not, however, by itself cure want
of title in the executant.
The proper principle is that an earlier registered
instrument executed by persons having transferable interest
is ordinarily entitled to serious judicial consideration, and a
subsequent record-of-rights or instrument cannot simply be
preferred over it without examining the source, extent and
continuity of title.
Accordingly, where the vendors under an earlier registered
deed derived their title from the admitted recorded owner,
and the transaction is supported by the surrounding

documentary and oral evidence, the Court should not
disregard
that
transaction
without
cogent
reasons.
Conversely, the Court must still determine whether the
vendors had title to the precise land conveyed and whether
the land subsequently claimed corresponds with the land
covered by the earlier deed.
Nevertheless, the learned Counsel for the opposite parties
relied upon the decision reported in 51 DLR (AD) 155,
contending that the suit for partition was defective because
the entire joint property had not been brought into the
hotchpot.
The principle emerging from the said decision is that, as a
general rule, a partition suit should embrace the entire joint
property of the parties, since piecemeal partition may give
rise to multiplicity of litigation. However, the rule is a matter
of general procedural convenience and is not absolute. Its
application is subject to recognized exceptions depending on
the nature, location, character, and circumstances of the
property and the rights of the parties.

The decision referred to by the learned Counsel itself
recognizes circumstances in which relaxation may be
permissible, including where properties are situated in
different jurisdictions, where particular property is incapable
of partition, where the property is impartible, where it is held
jointly with strangers who cannot conveniently be joined, or
where the co-sharers have agreed to partition only a portion
while retaining the remainder in common.
The principle of hotchpot, therefore, cannot be applied
mechanically. The Court must ascertain whether the omission
of a property has caused actual prejudice to the parties before
the Court and whether the rights of any person not before the
Court would thereby be affected.
In the instant case, the mere assertion that the entire
property of the jote was not brought into the hotchpot does
not, by itself, establish that the suit was incompetent. The
learned Appellate Court was required to demonstrate the
actual legal prejudice caused by such omission and the
manner in which the decree passed in the suit adversely

affected the rights of any person who was not before the
Court.
Moreover, where the omitted property or the rights of
an omitted person are not adjudicated upon, the decree in
respect of the properties actually before the Court cannot
ordinarily be construed as extinguishing an independent right
of such omitted person.
Thus, an otherwise maintainable partition suit cannot be
defeated solely on the ground of omission unless such
omission attracts a specific legal consequence under the
governing law or causes prejudice of such a nature as to
render the adjudication legally defective.
The record further indicates that an area relating to a
road was identified by the Commissioner and that
governmental
authorities,
including
Assistant
Commissioner (Land), Charfassion, and the Executive
Engineer, Roads and Highways, Barishal Circle, were
impleaded in the proceedings.

This aspect is material. If any portion of the land has
lawfully vested in or has been acquired by the Government or
a public authority, such property cannot be treated as
privately partitionable merely because it appears within a
private schedule. At the same time, the mere existence of a
road on or through the scheduled land does not automatically
establish that the entire disputed property is Government
property.
The Court must therefore distinguish between the
private title to the land and any public right, acquisition,
vesting, dedication or lawful governmental interest affecting a
particular portion thereof.
In the present case, the Commission Report identifying
the road area is relevant for determining the physical identity
and extent of the land. However, the presence of a road does
not, without more, defeat the plaintiffs' claim to the
remaining land, nor does it establish the defendants' title to
the private portion.

It is true that the jurisdiction under section 115 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, is not intended to provide a
second appeal on facts. Nevertheless, where the subordinate
Court has committed a material error of law, misread a
material document, omitted to consider vital evidence, or
arrived at a conclusion which is inconsistent with the evidence
on record, interference in revision may become warranted.
The present case is not one where this Court is merely
substituting its own view for a plausible view taken by the
learned Appellate Court. Rather, the question is whether the
learned Appellate Court, while reversing the Trial Court,
properly considered the material evidence, particularly the
earlier deed in favour of Ram Chandra, Deed No. 244 in favour
of Dhananjay, the Patta Deeds, the testimony of PW-2 and
PW-3, the C.S. Khatian and the Commission Report.
Upon careful examination, I find that the learned
Appellate Court gave decisive importance to Deed No. 244
without sufficiently examining the complete chain of
transactions and without adequately addressing the material
evidence which weighed with the learned Trial Court.

The appellate judgment, therefore, suffers from an
incomplete appreciation of the evidence and a failure to
reconcile material documentary evidence.
Upon a cumulative assessment of the entire evidence, I
find that the plaintiffs' case is supported by the C.S. record,
the oral evidence concerning possession, and the chain of
transactions, which requires consideration in light of the
admitted original ownership of Rashik Chandra.
PW-2's testimony regarding cultivation and possession
remained materially unshaken. PW-3's evidence regarding
possession was not challenged at all. The defendants failed to
elicit any material admission from those witnesses sufficient
to discredit their evidence.
On the other hand, although the defendants produced
Deed No. 244 as Exhibit-I, the legal consequence of that deed
required a more comprehensive examination of the preceding
and succeeding transactions. The deed may furnish a
documentary foundation for Dhananjay's acquisition of 3.79
acres, but the defendants' entitlement to the entire disputed

9.04 acres could not be established merely by proving that
one deed.
The crucial question was not merely whether Dhananjay
had acquired some land from persons claiming through Rashik
Chandra; it was whether the land so acquired was the same
land now claimed by the defendants and whether the
subsequent Patta Deeds and records-of-rights could validly
extend that title to the entire disputed property.
The learned Appellate Court, in my considered view, did
not adequately answer that question.
The learned Trial Court, though its observation
regarding the complete absence of any documentary basis for
Dhananjay's title requires qualification in view of Exhibit-I,
nevertheless correctly proceeded upon the fundamental
principle that the defendants had to establish the lawful
source and extent of their title. The subsequent R.S. and S.A.
entries could not, standing alone, supply the missing root of
title.

Accordingly, the learned Appellate Court committed a
material error in treating the subsequent records and the
existence of Deed No. 244 as sufficient to displace the Trial
Court's findings without undertaking a complete analysis of
the entire chain of title and the identity of the land.
Upon consideration of the pleadings, oral and
documentary evidence, the judgments of the Subordinate
Courts and the applicable principles of law, I am of the
considered view that the learned Appellate Court failed to
give due and adequate consideration to material evidence on
record and, in particular, failed to reconcile the earlier
transaction in favour of Ram Chandra with the subsequent
transaction in favour of Dhananjay and the Patta Deeds relied
upon by the defendants.
The learned Appellate Court also failed to adequately
consider the materially unshaken testimony of PW-2 and the
wholly unchallenged testimony of PW-3 regarding possession.
The evidentiary significance of the C.S. record and the
chronological sequence of the registered transactions was
likewise not properly addressed.

The finding of the learned Appellate Court, therefore,
cannot be sustained merely on the basis of Exhibit-I. The
existence of that deed may demonstrate a possible source of
title for Dhananjay to the extent of the land validly conveyed
thereby, but it does not, without proper identification and
correlation of the land, establish the defendants' title to the
entire suit property.
In the circumstances, I am constrained to hold that the
learned Appellate Court, in reversing the well-reasoned
judgment and preliminary decree of the learned Trial Court,
misread and/or failed to properly appreciate material
evidence and thereby arrived at findings which cannot be
sustained in law.
The decision reported in 51 DLR (AD) 155, relied upon
by the learned Counsel for the opposite parties, does not
advance the defendants' case to the extent contended. The
said decision recognizes that the general rule requiring all
joint properties to be brought into the hotchpot is a rule of
convenience and that relaxation may be permissible in
appropriate circumstances. The said principle cannot be

converted into an inflexible rule that every omission of
property automatically renders a partition suit incompetent,
particularly where no prejudice to the parties before the
Court has been demonstrated and where the rights of an
omitted person or property are expressly left unaffected.
At the same time, the present decree must necessarily
be understood as operating only upon the property and rights
properly adjudicated upon in the suit. No right of any person
not before the Court, nor any independent right in respect of
property not effectively adjudicated upon, can be treated as
extinguished merely by virtue of the decree.
For all the reasons stated above, I find that the learned
Trial Court's judgment and preliminary decree, though
requiring certain observations to be read in the light of
Exhibit-I, substantially represent a proper appreciation of the
evidence and the governing principles of law. The learned
Appellate Court, on the other hand, committed material
errors in reversing the same without adequately addressing
the relevant evidence and the complete chain of title.

Accordingly, the impugned judgment and decree of the
learned Appellate Court are liable to be set aside.
The plaintiffs' entitlement to saham shall, however,
remain confined to the extent lawfully established in the
preliminary decree, and the defendants, if otherwise entitled
in law, shall be at liberty to seek saham in accordance with the
applicable law and upon establishment of their lawful title,
without thereby disturbing or diminishing the plaintiffs' and
Government’s land in road adjudicated share.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the
pleadings, the evidence on record and the principles of law
discussed above, I find merit in the Rule.
Accordingly, the Rule is made absolute.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
However, the judgment and order dated 18.10.2021,
with the decree drawn up thereunder and signed on
24.10.2021, passed by the learned Additional District Judge,
Charfassion, Bhola in Title Appeal No. 13 of 2017, allowing the

appeal and thereby reversing the judgment and decree of the
learned Trial Court, are hereby set aside.
Consequently,
judgment
and
order
dated
30.11.2016, with the decree drawn up thereunder and signed
on 01.12.2016, passed by the learned Joint District Judge, 2nd
Court, Charfassion, Bhola in Title Suit No. 51 of 2015,
decreeing the suit in preliminary form, are hereby restored.
The restoration of the preliminary decree shall,
however, be subject to the lawful rights, if any, of any person
or authority in respect of any property not effectively
adjudicated upon in the suit, and shall not be construed as
adjudicating upon or extinguishing any independent right of
an omitted person or any Government/public interest not
falling within the scope of the present adjudication.
The order of stay and status quo granted earlier by this
Court is hereby recalled and vacated.
The Office is directed to transmit the Subordinate
Courts Records (SCR) forthwith, along with a copy of this

judgment,
to
concerned
Subordinate
Court
for
information and necessary action.
Before parting with the case, this Court records its
appreciation
for
diligent
assistance,
persuasive
submissions and valuable efforts rendered by the learned
Counsels appearing for both sides, which have assisted the
Court in reaching a just and lawful determination of the issues
involved.

(  Abdur Rahman, J )