IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION)

              Present:
Mr.  Justice S M Kuddus Zaman

And
Ms. Justice Tamanna Rahman Khalidi

FIRST APPEAL NO.209 OF 2011

Shukur Ali Master and others

.... Appellants

-Versus-
Doraj Kazi and others

.... Respondents
Mr. Md. Kaisaruzzaman, Advocate with
Mr. Syed Arifur Rahman, Advocate

…. For the appellants.
Mr. Md. Shahadat Tanveer Amin, Advocate

…. For the respondents.
Heard and Judgment on 07.07.2026.

S M Kuddus Zaman, J:

This First Appeal is directed against the impugned judgment and
decree dated 23.02.2011 passed by the learned Joint District Judge, 2nd
Court, Tangail in Partition Suit No.8 of 2006.
Facts in short are that respondent Nos.1-10 along with other 62
persons as plaintiffs jointly instituted above suit for partition of 16.41
acres land appertaining to R. S. Khatian Nos.198/1 and 198/2 of
Mouza- Egaro Kahonia as described in Schedule No.1 and 2.81 acres
land appertaining to C. S. Khatian No.296 corresponding to R.S.
Khatian No.508 of Mouza-Bakria as described in Schedule No.2 and

6.04 acres land appertaining to C. S. Khatian No.87 corresponding to R.
S. Khatian No.100 of Mouza- Haldia as described in Schedule No.3
claiming saham for 11.555
6 acres land.
The case of plaintiff Nos.10-11 for 6.04 acres land of Schedule
No.3 is that above property belonged to three brothers namely Kadar
Ali Sheikh, Bhomor Ali Sheikh and Gomor Ali Sheikh in equal shares
and C. S. Khatian No.87 was correctly prepared. Above Bhomor Ali
Sheikh died leaving one son and one daughter namely Gabu Sheikh
and Sundari and plaintiff Nos.10 and 11 are their successive heirs and
they have inherited 2.04 acres land and is in possession of above land.
But above properties were not portioned by meets and bounds and the
defendants refused to effect an amicable partition.
Defendant Nos.45-49 and 59 contested above suit by filing a joint
written statement alleging that above 6.04 acres land was owned, held
and possessed by three brothers Kadar Ali Sheikh, Bhomor Ali Sheikh
and Gomor Ali Sheikh and the same was correctly recorded in C. S.
Khatian No.87. Above Bhomor Ali Sheikh divorced his wife who
remarried elsewhere. Gabu Sheikh and Sundari were not biological son
and daughter of Bhomor Ali Sheikh nor they inherited his property.
During his life time above Bhomor Ali Sheikh transferred 2.011
3  acres
land by oral gift to his two brothers Kadar Ali Sheikh and Bhomor Ali
Sheikh and defendants as their successive heirs are owning and

possessing above land. Above land has been rightly recorded in their
names in the relevant S. A. Khatians.
At trial plaintiffs examined six witnesses and documents of the
plaintiffs were marked as Exhibit Nos.1-4 series. On the other hand
defendant Nos.45-49 and 59 examined three witnesses but they did not
produce and prove any document.
The learned District Judge decreed above suit on contest against
defendant Nos. 45-49 and 59 and on compromise against defendant
Nos.7-12, 14-27 and 29-33 and granted saham to the plaintiffs for 11.555
acres, defendant No.50 for 1.67 acres and defendant No.53 for 251
9 acres
land.
Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with above judgment and
decree passed by the learned Joint District Judge defendant No.45-49
and 59 as appellants moved to this Court and preferred this First
Appeal.
Mr. Md. Kaisaruzzaman, learned Advocate for the appellants
submits that admittedly 6.04 acres land of Schedule No.3 belonged to
three brothers Kadar Ali Sheikh, Bhomor Ali Sheikh and Gomor Ali
Sheikh and defendant Nos.45-49 and 59 are successive heirs of Kadar
Ali Sheikh and Gomor Ali Sheikh. Plaintiff Nos.10 and 11 claimed to be
the successive heirs of Bhomor Ali Sheik who had lawful title and
possession in 2.11
3 acres land. Defendants claim that Bhomor Ali Sheikh

was issueless and he transferred his total land by gift to his two
brothers Kadar Ali Sheikh and Gomor Ali Sheikh. Plaintiff Nos.10 and
11 did not give evidence in this suit in support of their claim that
Bhomor had one son namely Gabu Sheikh and a daughter namely
Sundari and plaintiff Nos.10 and 11 are their successive heirs. Plaintiffs
could not adduce any evidence, documentary or oral, to substantiate
above claim. DW6 and DW7 were the witnesses of defendant Nos.50
and 53 who compromised with the plaintiffs and they were not
witnesses of contesting defendant Nos.45-49 and 59. The learned Joint
District Judge committed serious illegality in decreeing above suit for
property of Schedule No.3 on the basis of uncorroborated evidence of
DW6 and DW7 which is not tenable in law.
On the other hand Mr. Md. Shahadat Tanveer Amin, learned
Advocate for the respondents submits that DW6 Mozibor Rahman is
the grandson of Gomor Ali Sheikh and DW7 Soleman is a daughter of
Kadar Ali Sheikh. As such DW6 and DW7 were competent witnesses to
give evidence as to the genology of Bhomor Ali Sheikh who in their
respective cross examination stated that Bhomor Ali Sheikh died
leaving one son Gabu Sheikh and daughter Sundari and plaintiff
Nos.10 and 11 were their successive heirs. On consideration of above
oral evidence of competent witnesses as to the genology of Bhomor Ali
Sheikh the learned Joint District Judge has rightly decreed above suit.
The defendants have claimed that Bhomor Ali Sheikh transferred his

land to his two brothers Kadar Ali Sheikh and Bhomor Ali Sheikh by
gift but they could not prove above claim by any evidence. On
consideration of above facts and circumstances of the case and
evidences on record the learned Joint District Judge rightly decreed
above suit which calls for no interference.
We have considered the submissions of the learned Advocates for
the respective parties and carefully examined all materials on record.
Respondent Nos.1-10 and other 62 persons in total 72 persons as
plaintiffs jointly filed above suit for partition for land of three separate
mouja and three separate C. S. Khatians which have been described in
details in Schedule Nos.1-3. The land of Schedule Nos.1 and 2 are not
claimed by plaintiff Nos.10 and 11 or defendant Nos.45-49 and 59.
Plaintiff Nos.10-11 claim to be the heirs of Bhomor Ali Sheikh and claim
his 2.01
2 acres land. Defendant Nos.45-49 and 59 contested above suit
claiming title and possession of land of Bhomor Ali Sheikh as described
in Schedule No.3. Those defendants do not have any claim in the
property of Schedule Nos.1 and 2. Defendant No.7-12, 24-27, 29-35, 50
and 53 admitted plaintiff’s title and possession in the land of Schedule
Nos.1 and 2 and executed solenama. On the basis of above solenama
the learned Judge of the trial Court passed compromise decree against
above defendants and the plaintiffs minus plaintiff Nos.10 and 11.
There is no common interest among all the plaintiffs and all the
defendants as to the partible land of tree separate Mouzas recorded

under various C. S. Khatians as described in Schedule Nos.1-3 of the
plaint. It is not understandable as to why the plaintiffs having claims of
separate land of separate C. S. Khatians of separate moujas against
separate defendants filed this one suit when there was no community of
interest between the parties and how above suit for partition was
tenable in law.
It turns out from the plaint that the plaintiffs have described the
disputed properties by mentioning C. S. Khatian and R. S. Khatians.
The R. S. Khatians were the revisional survey of the C. S. Khatians and
prepared before the publication of S. A. Khatian. When this suit was
filed in 2006 the latest record of rights were the S. A. Khatians but the
plaintiffs did not mention the corresponding S. A. Khatians and      S. A.
Plot Numbers of disputed property. A plaintiffs may have origin of his
title in the C. S. Khatian and he will have to mention that C. S. Khatian
in the schedule of the plaint but in order to get a decree from a Civil
Court he must mention the corresponding latest record of rights so that
the Court may determine who are the necessary parties to the suit and
for which land a decree is being sought. The failure of the plaintiffs to
describe corresponding S. A. Khatians of the disputed properties of C.
S. Khatian and R. S. Khatian make the suit properties unspecified and
vague which will create trouble at the time execution of the decree by
the Advocate Commissioner.

It is admitted that 6.04 acres land was owned, held and possessed
by three brothers Kadar Ali Sheikh, Bhomor Ali Sheikh and Gomor Ali
Sheikh in equal shares and C. S. Khatian No.87 was correctly prepared.
Plaintiff Nos.10 and 11 have claimed 2.011
3 acres land of Gomor Ali
Sheikh claiming that above Bhomor Ali Sheikh died leaving one son
Gabu Sheikh and one daughter Sundari and they are successive heirs of
above Gabu Sheikh and Sundari. Defendant Nos.45-49 and 59 have
claimed that above Bhomor Ali Sheikh was issueless and Gabu Sheikh
and Sundari were not biological son and daughter of Bhomor Ali
Sheikh. Since plaintiff Nos.10 and 11 have claimed title and possession
in above land as successive heirs of Bhomor Ali Sheikh the initial onus
rested upon them to prove that they are successive heirs of Bhomor Ali
Sheikh. Plaintiff Nos.10 and 11 who claim to be the successive heirs of
Bhomor Ali Sheikh were competent witnesses to give evidence as to the
genology of Bhomor Ali Sheikh. They should have made above claims
on oath before the trial Court and subjected themselves to cross
examination by the defendants. But plaintiff Nos.10 and 11 opted not to
stand in the witness box and give evidence in support of their above
claim.
Above plaintiffs authorized PW1 Kazi Md. Mozibor Rahman to
give evidence on their behalf who cannot be accepted as a competent
witness to give evidence as to genology of Bhomor Ali Sheikh. DW6
Mozibor Rahman and DW7 Soleman did not say in their respective

evidence that Bhomor Ali Sheikh died leaving one son Gabu Sheikh
and one daughter Sundari. But in cross examination by the plaintiffs
they stated that Bhomor Ali Sheikh had a son namely Gabu Sheikh and
a daughter namely Sundari. In cross examination the defendant DW6
Mozibor Rahman stated that he did not know the wife of Bhomor Ali
Sheikh nor he ever visited the house of the plaintiffs which is situated
in Ghataiyal and he lives in Madhupur. Similarly PW7 Soleman stated
in cross examination that Bhomor had four daughters and after demise
of Bhomor Ali Shiekh his wife married again. As mentioned above
DW6 Mozibor Rahman and DW7 Soleman already executed a solenama
with other plaintiffs and thereafter gave above evidence in reply to
cross examination by the plaintiffs.
On the other hand the defendant Nos.45-49 and 59 could not
adduce any documentary or oral evidence of competent witness to
substantiate their claim that Bhomor Ali Sheikh transferred 2.0411
3 acres
land to his two brothers Kadar Ali Sheikh and Bhomor Ali Sheikh by
gift and above Bhomor Ali Sheikh died issueless.
Plaintiff Nos.10 and 11 could not discharge their initial onus to
prove that Bhomor Ali Sheikh died leaving one son Gabu Sheikh and
one daughter Sundari by legal evidence.
On consideration of the above facts and circumstances of the case
and materials on record we hold that the ends of justice will be met if
the impugned judgment and decree is set aside and above suit is

remanded to the trial Court for retrial after giving both the parties an
opportunity to amend their respective pleadings and adduce further
evidence if any.
In above view of the facts and circumstances of the case and
materials on record we find substance in this First Appeal which
deserves to be allowed.
In the result, this First Appeal is allowed.
The impugned judgment and decree dated 23.02.2011 passed by
the learned Joint District Judge , 2nd Court, Tangail in Partition Suit
No.8 of 2006 is set aside and above suit is remanded to the trial Court
for retrial after giving both parties an opportunity to amend their
respective pleadings and adduce further evidence if any.

However, there will be no order as to cost.
Send down the lower Court record immediately.

Tamanna Rahman Khalidi, J:

             I agree.

MD. MASUDUR RAHMAN
     BENCH OFFICER