IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION)
Present
Mr. Justice Md. Riaz Uddin Khan
And
Mr. Justice Raziuddin Ahmed

First Appeal No. 17 of 2012

IN THE MATTER OF:
Abul  Kashem and another
... Defendant-Appellants
-Versus-
Sufia  Begum being died her heirs 1(1) Abul Hossain and others
... Plaintiff-Respondents
Mr. Zulfiqur Ahmed, Advocate
... For the Defendant-Appellants
Mr. Mr. S.R.M. Lutfor Rahman Akhand, Advocate
... For the Respondent Nos. 1(1) - 1(7)
Judgment on: 12.05.2026

Md. Riaz Uddin Khan, J:

This first appeal is directed against the judgment
and decree dated 26.10.2011 (decree signed on 02.11.2011)
passed by the Joint District Judge, 1st Court, Narayangonj
in Title Suit No. 102 of 2003 decreeing the suit for
partition.
Succinct facts for disposal of this first appeal
are that the respondent No.1 as plaintiff filed title Suit
No. 102 of 2003 before the trial court for partition of the
land of CS and SA plot nos.797, 798, 799, 1054, 1100 and
1101 measuring 279 decimals of land claiming half of the
share measuring 139½ decimals under C.S Khatian no.307 of
Kushiara Mouza, Police Station-Bandar, District-Narayangonj
as successor of CS recorded tenant Rahim Ali Sheikh and for
further declaration that the S.A and R.S records in the
names of the defendants are wrong. The defendants in three
sets contested the suit by filing separate written
statements. However, the defendant No.1 fully supported the
plaintiff’s case who is the full sister of the plaintiff
and did not adduce or produce any witness or evidence
before the court. The case of the defendant No.2 and 19 is
that the C.S. recorded tenant transferred the suit land of
CS dag no.1100 and 1101 measuring 86 decimals to one

Monohor and delivered possession. After the death of
Monohor and his wife the suit land measuring 86 decimals
was rightly recorded in the S.A Khatian and thereafter
Atarjan, daughter of Monohor transferred 47½ decimals of
land to Shahad Ali and Abdul Kader in 1948 by a registered
deed No.3857 dated 29.03.1948 and thereafter the suit land
was rightly recorded in R.S Khatian and the present
defendants are the successors of S.A and R.S Khatain. The
plaintiff along with defendant no.1 earlier tried to mutate
the suit land and after being informed the defendants had
filed objection and plaintiff’s mutation was cancelled. The
defendants’ further case is that they are in possession in
the suit land for more than 50 years and are enjoying the
possession of the land by paying rent to the Government.
The case of the another set of defendant Nos. 8, 9(Ka) to
9(Ga), 10, 11, 12(Ka) to 12 (Ga), 13 to 18 is that the C.S
recorded tenant Rahim Ali Sheikh transferred 63 decimals of
land of CS dag no.1054 to one Awlad Hossain by an
unregistered deed in the year 1935, as at that time the
registration was not compulsory which value was less than
Tk.100, hence it was not registered. Thus Awlad Hossain
became the owner and his name was rightly recorded in S.A
khatian. Thereafter, the Government acquired 20 decimals of
land from the said suit plot and paid compensation to Zakir
Hossain, the son of Awlad Hossain and thus this set of
defendants are in possession of 43 decimals of land.
Another set of defendants 21-29/37-43 filed written
statements contending inter alia that CS recorded tenant
Rahim sold entire suit land of CS dag nos.797, 798 and 799
to one Ashrab Ali by deed no.99 dated 06.01.1910, deed
no.310 dated 01.04.1916, deed no.6222 dated 27.11.1917,
deed
no.1570
dated
03.02.1917,
deed
no.1494
dated
31.01.1922, deed no.1139 dated 27.01.1922 along with nonsuited dag no.1417. Thereafter, Ashrab Ali died leaving 5
sons namely Akkas Ali, Atab Ali, Newaz Ali, Anar Ali and
Sadar Ali and one daughter Afzaler Ma as his heirs and
accordingly the SA and RS Khatian have been published
rightly in their names. Thereafter through series of

transactions by the SA and RS recorded owners these
defendants got the land and possessing the same by erecting
dwelling house and paying rent to government.
Upon these pleadings the trial court framed 07
issues-
1.
whether the suit is maintainable in its present
form and has been filed with insufficient court
fees;
2.
whether the suit is bad for defect of hotchpotch;
3.
whether the suit is bad for defect of parties;
4.
whether the plaintiff has title and possession in
the suit land;
5.
whether S.A and R.S records are wrong and the
plaintiff is entitled to get such declaration
that S.A and R.S records are wrong;
6.
whether
plaintiff
is
entitled
to
get
partition of 139½ decimals of land and
7.
whether the plaintiff is entitled to any other
relief or reliefs.
To prove their respective cases the plaintiff
adduced two witnesses including the plaintiff through her
attorney and produce three documents C.S, S.A and R.S
khatian beside the power of attorney by which the PW-1 was
empowered to adduce as witness on behalf of plaintiff. On
the other hand the contesting defendants adduced two
witnesses, one on behalf of the defendant No.10 and another
on behalf of the defendant No.2 and they have produced
documents which have been marked as Exhibits-Ka-1 to Gha-1.
After conclusion of trial the trial court decreed
the suit by his impugned judgment and decree dated
26.10.2011 on the findings that since the defendants could
not prove that land of CS recorded tenant was transferred
by producing any title deed hence the case of the plaintiff
is proved as successor of CS recorded tenant. The trial
court further found that though the PW-2 claimed the
plaintiff is in ejmali possession of the suit land but
could not specifically said in which dag and khatian she is
in possession and since the defendants did not produce any

witness to prove their possession hence by oral evidence
the possession of the plaintiff is proved.
Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said
judgment and decree dated 26.10.2011 the defendants 3 & 19
filed the instant first appeal before this Court.
This first appeal was fixed for hearing on the
instance of the learned advocate for the respondents 19,
22, 27-28, 36-38, 42 & 45.
Mr. Zulfiqur Ahmed, the learned Advocate appearing
for the appellants submits that it is the admitted case of
the defendant Nos.8 to 18 that Rahim Ali Sheik was the C.S
recorded owner of 2.79 acres of land including 63 decimals
in C.S dag No.1054 under C.S Khatian no.307 and the name of
Rahim Ali Sheikh was recorded in C.S Dag No.1054 in respect
of 63 decimals of land who transferred said 63 decimals for
a consideration of Tk.63.00 in the year 1935 by an
unregistered sale deed in favour of Md. Awlad Hossain and
delivered possession to him and since then Awlad Hossain
was in peaceful possession of the said 63 decimals of land
for more than 12(twelve) years and accordingly his name was
correctly recorded in the S.A Khatian No. 265 and
subsequently his name was also recorded in the R.S Khatian
No.314, R.S Dag Nos.540 and 1541 and after the death of
Awlad Hossain the defendants 8,9(Ka) to 9(Ga) 10, 11,
12(Ka) to 12(Ga), 13 to 18 became owners in possession of
the said land as heirs of late Awlad Hossain who received
compensation from government for acquisition of their land.
It is undeniable that the Government has acquired 20
decimals out of said 63 decimals of land and defendant
no.12, Zakir Hossain, one of the heirs of Awlad Hossain
received compensation money and the same clearly reveals
that the above defendants being the owners of the said land
received compensation money from the Government. Recording
of S.A Khatian and R.S Khatian in the name of Awlad
Hossain, the predecessor of the defendant Nos.8 to 18 were
made
accordance
with
law
without
any
objection
whatsoever and as such recording of both S.A and R.S in the
name of the predecessor of the above defendants was not

rebutted by the plaintiff, the same be treated to have been
made in accordance with law. Such recording in the name of
predecessor
above
defendants
palpably
established right, title and interest in respect of said 63
decimals of land by operation of section 144A of the State
acquisition and Tenancy Act, 1950 and the above defendants
being the heirs of late Awlad Hossain established their
right, title, interest and possession in the said land and
non consideration of the above aspect of the case the trial
court passed the impugned judgment and decree which is
liable to be set aside.
The learned advocate next submits that it is the
case of the defendant Nos.2 and 19 that their predecessor
Monohor Ali purchased 86 decimals of land from C.S Dag
Nos.1100 and 1101 and said Monohor died leaving behind
2(two) sons namely Shahad Ali and Abdul Kader and 3(three)
daughters namely Rahatun, Ahitun and Asimun and accordingly
Rahatun became the owner of 3 anna shares by way of
inheritance and thereafter as an owner Rahatun transferred
47½ decimals of land in Dag Nos.1100 and 1101 in favour of
Abdul kadir, father of defendant No.2 and Shahad Ali father
of defendant No.19 by a registered sale Deed No.3857 dated
29.3.1948 and since then Abdul Kadir and Shahad Ali are in
peaceful possession of the said land and after the death of
Abdul Kadir and Shahad Ali the defendants 2 and 19 became
the owner of 47½ decimals in dag no.1100 and 39 decimals in
Dag No.1101 totaling 86 decimals of land by inheritance and
purchase and they mutated their names in respect of the
said land and non consideration of the above facts the
impugned judgment and decree is liable to be set aside.
The learned advocate then submits that before
filing the instant suit the plaintiff and her sister
defendant no.1 filed a suit being Title Suit No.36 of 2003
in the Court of Assistant Judge, Bandar, Narayangonj
seeking a decree for declaration of Title in respect of the
same scheduled 2.79 acres of land. The defendants on
receipt of summons appeared in that suit and filed an
application under Order-VII, Rule-11 of the Code of Civil

Procedure for rejection of the plaint of the said suit. The
plaintiffs on receipt of the copy of the said application
under Order-VII, Rule-11 of the Code of Civil Procedure
withdrew the said suit on 27.8.2003 and ultimately filed
instant
suit
for
partition
simpliciter
without
declaration of title and from the above aspect of the case
it is very much clear that the plaintiff and defendant no.1
have no right, title and possession in the suit land. The
plaintiff and defendant No.1 earlier fraudulently mutated
their names vide Mutation Case No.51 of 1999-2000 and while
the above defendants came to know about mutation in the
name of the plaintiff, they filed Misc. Case No. 01 of 2000
and ultimately after hearing, the said Misc. case was
allowed by an order dated 04.04.2001 cancelling the
mutation of the plaintiff and defendant no.1 as they have
no possession in the suit land. On the other hand the
defendant Nos.2 and 19 being in possession of 86 decimals
of land mutated their names vide Mutation Case Nos. 840 of
2000-2001 and 842 of 2000-2001 both dated 11.2.2001 and
obtained D.C.R. in respect of the said land. The documents
filed by the defendants are of the year 1935 and in respect
of the same mutation has been made which palpably creates
right, title, interest and possession of the defendants.
Mr. Ahmed lastly submits that to succeed in the
case, the plaintiff is to prove her case in respect of her
right, title, interest and possession and weakness of the
defendants’ case is no ground to succeed. Jamindari dakhila
and rent receipts though not documents of title but are
important documents of possession and may be used as
collateral
evidence
possession,
since
possession
generally follows title. In the instant case the plaintiff
failed to produce any documentary evidence in respect of
her right, title and possession of the suit land save an
except the C.S Khatian in the name of Rahim Ali. On the
other hand the defendants produced a title document of 1948
which has been produced from the proper custody though the
defendants did not produce any document showing that the
C.S recorded tenant has transferred the suit land but from

the exchange of subsequent documents the names of the
predecessor of the defendants has been appearing in the S.A
khatian and thereafter in the R.S khatian which shows that
the defendants are in possession and the plaintiffs have
totally failed to produce any document to show that they
are in possession and admittedly the plaintiff lives in
Chattogram and in that view the trial court ought not to
have passed a decree in favour of the plaintiff considering
only the C.S record inasmuch as it is a salutary principle
of law that in the event of conflict between old record and
recent record, recent record of right would prevail
inasmuch as presumption of record loses its weight with
passage of time and entry in the subsequent Khatian which
would be more acceptable than the entry in the earlier
Khatian. Moreover, the suit is not maintainable in its
present form as admittedly the plaintiff claimed that she
should be put into possession by dispossessing the
defendants and of all sorts of obstructions hence the
plaintiff should have claimed title of the suit land and
non consideration of the above aspect the impugned judgment
and decree is liable to be set aside.
On the other hand the learned advocate for the
plaintiff-respondent did not appear during the hearing but
he came before this Court when we took up this matter for
delivery of the judgment.
We have heard the learned advocate for the
appellants, perused the memorandum of appeal, the lower
court records including the plaint, 3 sets of written
statements, the depositions of the parties and the
exhibited documents. We have also carefully examined the
impugned judgment passed by the trial court.
The present appeal has arisen from a suit for
partition simpliciter. Partition is the division made
between several persons of joint lands which belong to them
as co-proprietors, so that each becomes the sole owner of
the part which is allotted to him. A partition is the
adjustment of diverse rights regarding the whole by
distributing them on particular portion of the aggregate.

This follows from the principle that partition signifies
the transformation of joint possession into separate
possession.
Partition
converts
joint
enjoyment
into
enjoyment severally. It is the redistribution of preexisting rights among co-owners and not the acquisition of
rights. A suit for partition determines the share of the
co-sharers inter se. The partition in a suit is an
equitable right, and it should be seen while decreeing a
partition suit, how much equity can be done to the parties
without asking them to go to another suit. Partition may be
effected either of the following two ways: i) by amicable
settlement by the co-owners themselves; or ii) through
civil courts in a properly framed suit for partition. It
may be mentioned here that an amicable partition may not
get effect in the eye of law if dispute arises within
limitation period. Because a co-sharer in possession of
land less than his share is always entitled to pray for
partition by bringing properly framed suit for partition in
a competent court, he is entitled to get land partitioned
through court and defiantly, a co-sharer in possession of
excess land than his share is bound to part with the same.
Section 143B of the State Acquisition and Tenancy
Act, 1950 provides that when any recorded owner dies,
his/her heirs may amicably effect partition of the property
left by said propositus among them taking their respective
shares, and after such partition, they may register it. As
per this section it is a substantive right of a co-sharer
raiyat/owner of land to get partitioned thereof. If we
minutely read section 143B along with chapter XVII under
part-V of the State Acquisition and Tenancy Act it is
revealed that partition of lands can be sought for only by
those persons who are or whose predecessors were recorded
owners in the latest record-of-rights. If the persons who
or whose predecessor’s name were recorded in the former
record of rights, to get partition he must seek correction
of the wrong latest record first or to seek declaration of
title to the suit land. If the present record-of-rights is
not in the name of the plaintiff as per his share but

actually
he
has
right
and
title
said
Kkatian/holding, he cannot seek simple partition without
another prayer for declaration of title and both can be
sought in a single suit, in view of section 54 of SAT Act
read with rules 1-3 of Order II of the Code of Civil
Procedure.
In the case of Rezaul Karim and others Vs.
Shamsuzzoha and others reported in 49 DLR (AD) 68 our
Supreme Court (Appellate Division) observed that in a suit
for partition the court will no doubt consider the title of
the plaintiff to the suit land in some details more than in
a suit for permanent injunction, but it cannot in either
case convert itself into a court for determination of the
respective titles of the parties if a serious dispute
emerges from the pleadings as to the title of the
plaintiffs to the partible property and if it is not
possible to effect partition without formally determining
the plaintiffs’ title to the property claimed in the
partition suit. However, in a partition suit, the plaintiff
can establish his title, if necessary. To settle a dispute
properly among the co-sharers of joint properties, suit for
partition is the best form of suit. It is also known as the
mother suit. It has been settled by a catena of decisions
by our Supreme Court that all types of disputes may be
settled in a single suit for partition, e.g. whether a deed
is forged or false, legal or even acted upon, whether a
person
has
acquired
title
over
some
land
jote/holding
by
adverse
possession.
However,
connotation ‘mother suit’ signifies only that in a suit for
partition simpliciter, title and shares between the parties
in the joint properties can be considered and ascertained,
not to giving all sorts of reliefs. Because, when
plaintiff’s title is disputed/clouded in any way, either by
dispossession or by wrong record of latest record-ofrights, in that case a simple partition is not enough, he
must seek recovery of possession and/or declaration of
title as the case may be within a statutory limitation
period. If there is any impediment in getting the relief,

the plaintiff must have to pray also for removing those
impediments. To our view, the ‘mother suit’ does not
necessarily means to grant all necessary further and/or
consequential reliefs in a suit for simple partition
without properly framed suit.
Only co-owner or co-sharer of a holding/jote/
khatian in the land can seek partition. As the law stands
today according to sections 81, 82, 143B, 144 and 144A of
the SAT Act, 1950, the person in whose name the last
record-of-rights has been recorded is the owner of the
lands of the holding/jote/khatian until and unless it is
proved to be incorrect. In view of section 54 of the SAT
Act read with section 53C of the Transfer of Property Act,
1882 only this record-of-rights is tantamount to title
until and unless it is declared incorrect by competent
authority. In view of section 144 and 144A of the SAT Act
after publication of latest record-of-rights, the former
record-of-rights loses its entity and effect, and all
rights and liabilities laid down in part-V of the SAT Act
will divest to the holders of latest record-of-rights. It
has already been mentioned that to claim that the plaintiff
is co-owner in the suit partible property, he must show
that he has rightful shares in the suit property in the
latest record-of-rights. However, if actually he has right
and title in the latest Kkatian/holding, he can seek
partition only by another prayer for declaration of title
within 6(six) years and must state regarding the position
of the latest record-of-rights. In the case reported in 56
DLR (AD) 53 our Supreme Court held that against the wrong
record of rights the person whose interest is affected by
such wrong recording he is required to file suit seeking
declaration of title within six years from the date the
person in whose name record has been wrongly prepared and
finally published raises claim denying his claim on the
basis of wrong record.
It may be mentioned here that as per section
103B(5) of the Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885 applicable for the
then East Bengal (now Bangladesh) CS record has presumptive

value of correctness while as per section 144A of the State
Acquisition and Tenancy Act, 1950 RS record has presumptive
value of correctness. At this stage let us examine section
103B(5) of the Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885 and section 144A of
the SAT Act, 1950 which run as follows:
Section 103B(5) of The Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885-
Every
entry
a
record-of-rights
finally
published
shall be evidence of the matter
referred to in such entry, and shall be presumed
to be correct until it is proved by evidence to
be incorrect.
Section 144A of the State Acquisition and Tenancy Act,
Section 144A. Presumption as to correctness of
record of rights- Every entry in record-of-rights
prepared or revised under section 144 shall be
evidence of the matter referred to in such entry,
and shall be presumed to be correct until it is
proved by evidence to be incorrect.
From the plain reading of the above two provisions
of the two laws it is crystal clear that language of both
the provisions are almost similar. So, both has presumptive
value of correctness but this correctness is not absolute
rather rebuttable. Now, the question arises in case of
dispute which one will prevail. It may be mentioned that by
promulgation of SAT Act, 1950 the BT Act, 1885 has been
repealed. As per section 144A of the SAT Act the last
record-of-rights is the evidence and certificate of
possession which usually follows title/ownership unless it
is proved incorrect. The burden of proof regarding the
incorrectness of such record heavily lies upon who claims
so and most importantly by simple showing the CS record the
incorrectness of RS record cannot be proved automatically.
The claimant must prove it by adducing positive evidence.
The latest record of rights excludes the previous record of
rights as per section 144A of the SAT Act, 1950. Therefore,
when in latest RS Khatian the plaintiffs’ or their
predecessors’ names are total absent, rather it stands in

the names of outsiders having no genealogical connection
with the previous recorded owners, it can obviously be said
that the plaintiff’s title to the suit land has been
clouded/disputed by such latest record and certainly strong
presumption is that they are not in possession of the same.
In such case he/they must seek declaration of title and or
recovery of possession along with partition of his/their
share. In a suit for partition the parties must seek
his/their share in the jote or ejmali properties.
It is long settled that in a partition suit, the
status of a plaintiff and the defendant is almost
identical. In other words the plaintiff and the defendant
stand in the same position and that a party in a partition
suit whether a plaintiff or defendant, is at the same time
a plaintiff as well as a defendant and this dual capacity
arises from the very nature of a partition proceeding where
each party who is a co-sharer be he in the category of the
plaintiff or of the defendant is entitled to ask for
partition of his share and separate allotment.
In a suit for partition, ejmali possession with cosharer is not only important but also necessary. However,
it is well settled that among co-sharers themselves
possession
one
co-sharer
is
possession
all.
The general rule is that the suit for partition usually is
not barred by limitation but this is not absolute. When the
plaintiff is excluded from joint possession of the suit
land and it continues for more than statutory period of 12
years, the suit should be barred by limitation as mandated
under Article 144 read with section 28 of the Limitation
Act. This ouster of possession may occur by excluding his
name in the last record-of-rights which has been recorded
in the name of stranger having no genealogical connection
with the plaintiff and the plaintiff does not challenge the
said wrong record published excluding his name within
statutory limitation period. Adverse possession cannot be
claimed against a co-sharer, though other co-sharer is long
time out of possession, unless there is a denial of their
right to their knowledge by the person in possession, and

exclusion and ouster following thereon for the statutory
period of 12 years. A wrong record-of-rights can be
corrected either by- i) a decree for declaration of title
and or possession by a civil court as mandated under
section 54 of the SAT Act or ii) a decree for correction of
the record by Land Survey Tribunal under section 145A of
the SAT Act. For that reason, in our view, if the record is
wrong, the same cannot be corrected in a suit for simple
partition without a declaration of title.
Now, in the light of above position of law let us
consider the present case.
In the present suit the plaintiff claimed partition
of the property of CS recorded tenant Rahim Ali Sheikh as
his successor and on the other hand one set of defendants
claimed that the property measuring 86 decimals was
transferred to one Monohor whose name was finally recorded
in SA Khatian and thereafter Abdul Kader and Shahad Ali
became owners by way of inheritance and purchase on
29.03.1948 and accordingly RS record was prepared in their
names. Another set of defendants claimed that suit land
measuring 63 decimals was transferred to one Awlad Hossain
in the year 1935 on consideration of Tk-63/- whose name was
recorded in SA Khatian no.265 and subsequently in RS Khatan
no.314 as per section 144 of the SAT Act, 1950. The
defendants claimed suit property in total denial of the
title of the plaintiff.
It appears from the impugned judgment and decree
that the trial court in a very slipshod manner decreed the
suit without discussing the evidence on record on the
finding that since the defendants could not produce any
document regarding the transfer of property from CS
recorded tenant, the basis of SA record as claimed by them,
the defendants failed to prove their case and as successor
of CS recorded tenant the plaintiff is entitled to get a
decree of partition. In deciding so the trial court missed
the position of law that plaintiff has to prove her case
and cannot stand on the weakness of the defendant’s case.

The plaintiff claimed partition on the basis of CS
record but did not claim partition from the latest recordof-rights in total denial of the title of the defendants
except her sister, defendant no.1. We have already observed
that only co-owner or co-sharer of a holding/jote/khatian
in the land can seek partition. As the law stands today
according to sections 54, 81, 82, 143, 143B, 144 and 144A
of the SAT Act, 1950, the person in whose name the last
record-of-rights has been recorded is the owner of the
lands of the holding/jote/ khatian until and unless it is
proved to be incorrect. In view of section 54 of the State
Acquisition and Tenancy Act coupled with section 53C of the
Transfer of Property Act only this record-of-rights is
tantamount to title until and unless it is declared
incorrect by competent authority. In view of section 144
and 144A of the SAT Act after publication of latest recordof-rights, the former record-of-rights loses its entity and
effect, and all rights and liabilities laid down in part-V
of the SAT Act will divest to the holders of latest recordof-rights. It has already been mentioned that to claim that
the plaintiff is co-owner in the suit partible property, he
must show that he has rightful shares in the suit property
in the latest record of rights. However, if actually he has
right and title in the latest Khatian/holding, he can seek
partition only by adding another prayer for declaration of
title and must state regarding the position of latest
record of rights. In the present suit the plaintiffs did
not seek partition of property of latest record-of-rights,
that is, RS record which does not stand in her name. In
such circumstances the simple suit for partition is not
maintainable without declaration of title. Because, since
the name of the plaintiff or her predecessor has not been
recorded in SA Khatian admittedly published in 1962 and
most importantly RS Khatian, the latest record-of-rights
admittedly published in 1970 also did not publish in her
predecessors or her name. The plaintiff has totally failed
to show any document of jamindary Dakhila or rent receipts
from the government.

Further, with regard to possession, the plaintiffs
claimed in the plaint total possession in denial of the
defendants but PWs admit possession of the defendants by
erecting dwelling house and the plaintiff resides in
Chattogram. So, the possession as claimed by the plaintiff
orally, are contradictory and admittedly without any
supporting documents. The plaintiffs do not recognize the
contesting
defendants
as
co-owners
suit
holding/Khatian. As such the plaintiff and the defendants
are not co-sharers of the suit property as it reveals from
the pleadings of the parties. If the contesting parties
claim their title to the suit land from the same heading of
title, i.e. from same/common predecessor-in-interest, only
then it can be said that the parties have community of
interest in the suit properties. But if the root of adverse
party’s title is disputed by any party, then complicated
question of title arose and suit for partition simpliciter
is not maintainable. In other words if there is no
community of interest, that is, if disputing parties have
no joint ownership or interest in the suit property, rather
the contesting parties have adverse claim over the suit
property, or parties claim from different heads of title,
suit for simple partition is not the option for resolving
the dispute. In the instant suit there is no community of
interest of the plaintiff in the suit land scheduled for
partition with the contesting defendants. Their claims are
not from the same/common predecessor-in-interest. In that
view, the plaintiffs have failed to establish the community
of interest in the suit holding with the defendants.
It appears from the impugned judgment that the
learned Judge in a wrong contention at the very outset said
that this is a suit for declaration of title and partition
which is clearly a wrong finding. After meticulous
examination of the plaint we do not find that the plaintiff
sought title over the suit land rather she specifically
prayed for partition simpliciter with a declaration that
the record of S.A and R.S khatian are wrong. Since the
plaintiff did not produce any document other than the

03(three) khatian: C.S, S.A and R.S she could not prove her
title and possession over the suit land for at least 50-60
years, the suit land is recorded in the names of the
defendants’ predecessors. On the other hand though the
defendants claimed title and possession over the suit land
by producing some subsequent deeds and rent receipts but
they have also failed to produce sufficient documents or
sufficient evidence to prove their title in the suit
property.
In such view of the matter since it is a suit for
partition and in our considered view, in the given facts
simple suit for partition is not maintainable, hence we
think the suit should be sent on remand for re-trial giving
a chance to the plaintiff to amend the plaint claiming
title after paying proper court fees.
In the result the appeal is allowed. The impugned
judgment and decree dated 26.10.2011 passed by the trial
court is set aside. The suit is sent back on remand for retrial giving a chance to the plaintiff to amend the plaint
claiming title and in that case the trial court should give
chance to all the parties to amend their pleadings, if
necessary and adduce and produce documents and evidence.
Since it is a case of 2003, the trial court is directed to
dispose of
suit as
early as possible without
unnecessary adjournments.
Send down the Lower Court Records along with a copy of
this judgment at once.

Raziuddin Ahmed, J:

I agree.

Ziaul Karim
Bench Officer