IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(CRIMINAL MISCELLANEOUS JURISDICTION)

Present:
Mr. Justice K.M. Hafizul Alam
And
Mr. Justice Abdur Rahman

  Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 54742 of 2022

In the matter of:

Most. Akhi Begum
        ......Informant-petitioner
-Versus-
The State & another
........Opposite parties
Mr. Anisur Rahman (Raihan), Advocate
                                        ........For the Accused-petitioner
None appeared.

.......For the opposite party No. 01
Ms. Shiuli Khanam, DAG, with
Mr. Md. Nazrul Islam (Choton), DAG,
Mr. Md. Humayun Karim Siddique, AAG and
Ms. Aklima Parven, AAG
                                                           .......For the State

Heard on 19.11.2025 and 23.11.2025.
Judgment on 11.01.2026 A.D., Sunday, 27 Poush,
1432 B.S.

Abdur Rahman, J.
This Rule was issued at the instance of the informant
petitioner, calling upon the opposite parties in the
following terms:
“GB g‡g© ivóª-Acicÿ‡`i cÖwZ KviY `k©v‡bvc~e©K iæj Rvix Kiv
nBj,
‡Kb cUzqvLvjxi `vqiv RR Av`vj‡Zi †dxR`vix 83/2021 bs  wiwfk‡b
cÖPvwiZ 09/02/2022 Zvwi‡Li ZwK©q ivq I Av‡`k i` I iwnZ (set
aside ) Kiv nB‡e bv? †h ivq I Av‡`kg~‡j cUzqvLvjxi Pxd RywWwkqvj
g¨vwR‡÷ªU
Av`vj‡Z
`Ûwewai
143/341/323/325/326/
302/307/34 avivi Awf‡hv‡M wePviaxb wR.Avi. 05/2017 bs gvgjvq
cÖPvwiZ 02/03/2021 Zvwi‡Li ivq I Av‡`k envjc~e©K †dxR`vix
wiwfkbwU bv-gÄyi Kiv nBqv‡Q ; †hLv‡b Avmvgx-Acicÿ‡K AÎ gvgjv
nB‡Z Ae¨vnwZ †`Iqv nBqv‡Q Ges AÎ Av`vj‡Zi we‡ePbvq Avmvgx-
`iLv¯ÍKvix b¨vqwePv‡ii ¯^v‡_© Avi †h mKj cÖwZKvi cvB‡Z cv‡ib
ZvnviI †Kb Av‡`k †`Iqv nB‡e bv?”

The prosecution case, in short, is that on 22.01.2017
at about 20.35 hours the informant-petitioner as an
informant lodged First Information (FI) with Dumki
Police Station, Patuakhali against 9 accused persons along
with 2/3 unknown accused persons which has been
recorded as Dumki Police Station case No. 05 dated
22.01.2017, under Sections 143, 341, 323, 325, 326, 307and
506 of the Penal Code, 1860 stating the facts, inter-alia that
both the parties are the inhabitants of the same village, and
there election dispute was occurred between both the
parties regarding UP election and the father of the
informant namely Mojibur Bhuiyan (Victim) earlier lodged
3 cases against the accused persons which are pending
before the learned Court concerned. Due to the previous
enmity and grudge, the accused persons threatened the
informant party to kill them. At one stage, on 20.01.2017
at about 05.00 hours, the accused persons made an
unlawful assembly armed with country-made deadly

weapons and attacked the informant party and injured
them grievously. Upon hearing hue and cry, the neighbors
came forward to the place of occurrence, and the accused
persons left the place of occurrence by threatening the
informant party. Thereafter, the injured victims were taken
to General Hospital, Patuakhali, for treatment. Upon
considering the critical condition of the father of the
informant, including her cousin, they were referred to
Sheer-E-Bangla Medical College Hospital, Barishal, for
better treatment. On 23.1.2017 at about 04.00 hours, the
father of the informant, namely Mojibur Bhuiyan,
succumbed to death under treatment. Being informed, the
police made an inquest report regarding the dead body of
the deceased and sent the dead body to the Morgue of
Sher-E-Bangla Medical College Hospital, Barishal, for a
postmortem report on 23.1.2017, and the investigating
officer added section 304 of the Penal Code, 1860 with the
FIR, hence the case.

To add the facts, on 1.2.2017, one injured victim,
Md. Rubel Bhuiyan, being the complainant, filed a C.R.
Case No. 102 of 2017 before the learned Senior Judicial
Magistrate, Cognizance Court No.1, Patuakhali against 3
accused persons along with some other unknown persons
alleging offence punishable under Sections 143, 341, 302,
325, 326, 307, 323, 506, 114 and 149 of the Penal Code,
1860.

Thereafter, the case was investigated by the police
and found prima-face case, and during the investigation,
one accused made a confessional statement under Section
164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (later on be
termed as Cr.P.C), and he disclosed the name of one Md.
Jashim Fakir, who was not an FIR-named accused. After
completing the investigation, the investigating officer
submitted a charge sheet, bearing No. 67 dated 24.12.2017,
against 9 accused persons along with a prayer for
discharging the accused opposite party No.2, against which

the informant petitioner filed a Naraji Petition and the
learned Court below directed the DB (District Detective
Branch), Patuakhali, to hold further investigation. After
completing necessary further investigation, the DB,
Patuakhali, submitted a supplementary charge sheet being
No. 32 dated 17.7.2019 against 9 accused, along with a
prayer for discharging the accused opposite party No.2.

Thereafter, on 14.11.2019, the informant filed a
Naraji Petition against the said police report, and after
hearing, the learned Magistrate was pleased to reject the
said Naraji Petition on 02.03.2021. Thereafter, the
informant petitioner filed a fresh Criminal Revision being
No. 83 of 2021, against the order of learned Magistrate
before the learned Sessions Judge, Patuakhali and after
hearing the learned Sessions Judge was pleased to reject
the said Criminal Revision and thereby upheld the order
dated 02.03.2021 passed by the learned Senior Judicial
Magistrate, vide impugned judgment and order dated

09.02.2022, and subsequently, the informant petitioner
filed this Criminal Miscellaneous Case under section 561A
of the CPC challenging the impugned judgment and order
of the learned Sessions Judge, Patuakhali.

Mr. Abid Hossain, the learned Advocate appearing
on behalf of the informant petitioner, has submitted that
though the opposite party No.2, Md. Jashim  Fakir, who
was not an FIR-named accused, but the principal accused,
Md. Ruhul Amin Shikder made a confessional statement
under section 164 of the CPC who disclosed the name of
the accused opposite party No.2 including other accused in
commissioning the alleged offence of the case.
Learned Advocate further submitted that the learned
Sessions Judge also failed to consider the facts and
circumstances of the case, thereafter the impugned order is
not sustainable or tenable in the eye of law, hence, the
same is liable to be quashed.

On the other hand, none appeared for the opposite
party No.2, thus the learned Deputy Attorney General,
Md. J.R. Khan Robin, appearing on behalf of the State
opposite party, opposed the Rule.
We have perused the application along with the
prosecution materials annexed thereto. We have also
considered the submissions made by the learned Deputy
Attorney General.
The prosecution’s material exposes that one coaccused Ruhul Amin made a confessional statement who
disclosed the name specifically stated that, “তখন বােরক বেল
আিম জিসমেক িদলাম, জিসম নাক মুখ বেধ কলবািড়র বাজাের িছল।
আিম কলবািড় বাজার থেক বািড় িগেয় আিম ল আিমন, সিহদুল, লাবু,
কালু, সােহল একে মটর সাইেকেল রওনা হই পেথ জিসমেক িনেয়
বাজােরর িদেক যাই। আমােদর দেখ ম#জবর ভূইয়া ও েবল দৗড় দয়।
ম#জবুর ভূইয়া আমােদর দেখ এক'ট বাশ হােত নয় মারার জন)। ম#জবুর
ভূইয়া ঐ বাশ +ারা আমােক বাির িদেত গের ম#জবুর িনেজই কাত হেয়
পাকা রা,ার উপর পেড় যায়। তারপর আিম জিসম, বাচ্চ0 িমেল লা'ঠ

[গােবর লা'ঠ! +ার। ম#জবুর ভ0ইয়ােক িপতাই। লাবলু শিহদুল ও সােহল ঐ
েবলেক মাের। আমরা খুেনর উে2েশ) বাির দইিন। কবল আ#জজুর
ভ0ইয়ার পােয়র হাঁট0র িনেচ কেয়ক'ট বাির িদেয় বািড় চেল আিস। এলাকার
লাকজন আসেল আমরা 4ত এই 5ান ত)াগ কির।”, which
consummately divulged that the confession made by Md.
Ruhul Amin was inculpatory in nature who entwined the
name of Jasim Fakir prima facie bears the truth with the
act of committing a crime (i.e., in flagrante delicto), unless
dismantled by other legal evidence. But both the
Subordinate Courts blink off to the legal effect if so facto.
However, it is evident from the Naraji Petition (i.e.,
petition of protest) that the informant specifically mention
that, “তাছাড়াও 6া7 মাক2মার তদ8কারী কম:কত:া মায়ূন কিবর কতৃ:ক
স#<= আসািম জিসম ফিকেরর 6িরত ফেরায়ািডংেয় উেAখ কেরন য, ধৃত ১নং
আসািম ল আিমেনর ফৗজদাির কায:িবিধ ১৬৪ ধারার জবানব#< মেত
জিসেমর নাম 6কাশ কিরয়ােছ উেAখ কের। অথচ ফৗজদাির কায:িবিধ ১৬৪
ধারার জবানব#< মেত 6াF একজন আসািমেকও তদ8কারী অন)ায়ভােব
অব)াহিতর 6াথ:না কিরয়ােছ। যাহােত বাদীপেGর Hতর Gিতর কারণ
হইয়ােছ।”, but the learned Magistrate at the time of passing

impugned order mention that, “বাদীর 6ধান আপিJ হেলা সিKক্ষ
আসায়ী মাঃ জিসম ফিকর কন C/S এ Not sent up করা হেলা। িকN
িতিন িনেজই ঘটনার ০২, (দুই) িদন পের এজাহার দােয়র করেলও মাঃ জিসম
ফিকরেক আসামী কেরন নাই। উেAখ য এজাহার দােয়েরর িদন িডিসR মাঃ
ম#জবর ভ0 ইয়া ও #জিবত িছল। এজাহারকারী Sভাবতই িডিসR ম#জবর ভ0 ইয়া ও
২নং সাGী মাঃ েবল ভ0 ইয়ােদর কােছ Tেন এজাহার দােয়র কেরেছন। আসামী
মাঃ ল আিমন িসকদার তার ফৗঃ কাঃ িবঃ ১৬৪ ধারার জবানব#<েত আসামী
িহেসেব জিসম ফিকেরর নাম উেAখ করেলও সাGীেদর জবানব#<েত জিসম
ফিকেরর জিড়ত থাকার িবষয়'ট উেAখ নাই এবং ঘটনা5েল জিসম ফিকেরর
ব)বVত কান বW সাG)ও পাওয়া যায় নাই। --- কউ কাউেক জিড়ত কের জবান
ব#< িদেলই স আসামী হেয় যায় না যতGন না তার িবেY সাG) 6মান পাওয়া
যায় আদালত এমনটাই মেন কের। এমতাব5ায় বাদীর আিনত না-রাজী দরখা,
gÄyi করার মত যু#7 সংগত কান কারন না থাকায় না-রাজী দরখা, bvgÄyi
করা হেলা।” From this type of order it is presumed that the
learned Magistrate has assumed the power of Sessions
Judge to analyze the evidences like a murder case, rather to
find out the prima facie of offence or to arrange
investigation to have prima facie for taking cognizance of
the offence alleged. It is the established principle of law as
per Section 193 of the Cr.P.C that no Sessions Judge shall

take cognizance of any offence as a Court of original
jurisdiction unless the accused has been sent to it by a
Magistrate duly empowered in that behalf.
However, the other essence of the facts of the case is
that the investigating officer, after due verification of the
statement of the accused person(s), the investigating
officer produced the accused person before the Magistrate
for recording the confession judicially. For better
understanding, we can examine the relevant provisions of
Regulation No. 283 of the Police Regulation, 1943, which
are as follows:
“283. (a) (i) When an accused or suspected person
volunteers a confession, it should be recorded in detail by a
police officer who, if it appears to be true, shall take
immediate steps for its verification. Such verification
should include the tracing and examination of witnesses
named or indicated in the confession and the search for, or

the recovery of, stolen property or other exhibits material
to the investigation.
The officer recording the confession shall further
arrange for the confessing person to be sent to a
Magistrate in order that the confession may be judicially
recorded.”
From the plain appraisal of the above provisions of
law, it is clear that the investigating officer definitely
arranged the measurement of verification and thus
produced the accused person before the learned
Magistrate, who also endorsed a memorandum that the
confession was voluntarily made, admitted to be correct
and it contains a full and true account of statement made
by him, which cannot be rebutted without any sanguine
evidence that contradicts it in a trial by a proper Court. In
the instant case, the investigating officer who arranged the
stage of recording confession judicially cannot stand
against his own footing of verification of the said

confession; and if so, be that, both investigating officers
might come under the compulsions of offences under
Sections 217 and 218 of the Penal Code, 1860.
From the very facts of the instant case, it is found
that the informant initially mentioned some persons
specifically and 2/3 unknown persons as accused in the
First Information, including 8 witnesses, and subsequently
revealed the name of the opposite party No. 2 Jashim
Fakir, through a confessional statement, who has not been
sent up in the police report. But when the Naraji petition,
having the status of a fresh complaint including Section
302 of the Penal Code, 1860, came before the learned
Magistrate, who deliberately failed to examine the
complainant of Naraji petition under Section 200 of the
Cr.P.C and mentioned that, “avh© ZvwiL bw_ †ck Kiv nBj| ---
†`wLjvg, gvgjvi bw_, GRvnvi, C/S, bvivRx `iLv¯Í I  CD
ch©v‡jvPbv Kwijvg| ---Not sent up Avmvgx †gvt Rwmg dwKi‡K
gvgjvi `vq nB‡Z Ae¨vnwZ †`Iqv nBj|Ó which manifestly

indicates that the learned Magistrate assumed power under
Section 202(1) of the Cr.P.C as he inquired into the case
himself, but overlooked the provisions of Section 202(2A)
of the said Code where it is denoted as, if it appears to the
Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable
exclusively by the Court of Sessions, he shall call upon the
complainant to produce all his witnesses and examined
them on oath. Surprisingly, the learned Sessions Judge also
failed to address these mandatory provisions of law, which
was shocking to go through the smooth way of the rule of
justice.
Upon perusal of the materials on record, considering
the facts and circumstances as well of the prepositions of
law, we are of the view that the Naraji Petition submitted
by the informant petitioner which was earlier rejected
should be heard again by a Senior Magistrate then the
earlier Senior Judicial Magistrate as per law and the learned
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Patuakhali is hereby directed to

hear the Naraji Petition by himself or to make arrangement
to hear the same any Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate
giving proper notice /summons for appearance of the
opposite party No.2 Md. Jashim Fakir for allowing being
heard with the due process of law.
Having
considered
the
submissions,
legal
propositions, facts and circumstances, we are of the view
that the Rule has merit. Accordingly, the impugned
judgment and order dated 09.02.2022 are set aside.
In the Result, the Rule is made absolute with the
above observations and directions.
The office is directed to communicate this judgment
and order forthwith.

                                        ( Abdur Rahman, J)
K. M. Hafizul Alam, J:

          I agree,

( K.M. Hafizul Alam, J)