IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION)

Present:
       Mr. Justice Md. Bashir Ullah

Criminal Appeal No. 9039 of 2023

In the matter of:
An Appeal under Section 10(1)(a) of the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958.
And
In the matter of:
Abdul Kuddus Khan
                                ... Appellant
-Versus-
The State and another
                                     ... Respondents

Mr. Md. Shah Alam Sarker, Advocate

                                        ... For the Appellant

Mr. Bivuti Tarofder, Advocate

                                 … For the Respondent No. 2.

Mr. Md. Shafiquil Islam, D.A.G with

          Ms. Farhana Abedin, A.A.G with

Mr. Hemayth Uddin, A.A.G and
Mr. K. M. Saiful Islam, A.A.G

                                                  … For the State

Heard on: 22.01.2026, 26.04.2026,
28.04.2026, 04.05.2026 and 14.05.2026
Judgment on: 10.06.2026.

This appeal, preferred under Section 10(1)(a) of the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958 is directed against the
judgment and order dated 16.08.2023 passed by the learned

Special Judge (Senior District & Sessions Judge), Special
Judge Court, Faridpur in Special Case No. 09 of 2022,
corresponding to Dudak Integrated District Office, Faridpur
Case No. 01 dated 28.01.2020, convicting the appellant under
Section 409 of the Penal Code, 1860-read with Section 5(2) of
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and sentencing him to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of 05(five) years
with a fine of Tk. 10,000/- (ten thousand), in default to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for a period of 03(three) months. The
appellant was, however, acquitted of the charges under section
468, 471 and 109 of the Penal Code.
The facts relevant for disposal of the appeal, in short, are
that one Md. Abu Sayed, Assistant Director, the AntiCorruption Commission, Faridpur, lodged a First Information
Report (FIR) stating inter alia that during an enquiry under
Memo No. E/R 35/2018, conducted by the Anti-Corruption
Commission, Integrated District Office, Faridpur, it was
revealed that one Nishikanta Karmakar was the owner of 33
decimals of land appertaining to S.A. Khatian No. 217 and Plot
No. 347 under Surjadia Mouza, Police Station Boalmari,

District Faridpur. Subsequently, the said Nishikanta Karmakar
left for India without leaving any heir in Bangladesh and at the
time of B.S. record, the said property was recorded under khas
Khatian No. 1/1 in the name of the Deputy Commissioner,
Faridpur on behalf of the Government of Bangladesh,
corresponding to BS Plot No. 411.

On 15.04.2018, accused Minoz Saha and Gobinda Saha
submitted an application before the Assistant Commissioner
(Land), Boalmari seeking mutation of the land in their names
for payment of land development tax. Despite having full
knowledge that the land appertaining to BS Plot No. 411 and
khas Khatian No. BS 1/1, which is government khas land was
recorded in the name of the Deputy Commissioner, Faridpur,
on behalf of the Government of Bangladesh, accused Md.
Abdul Kuddus Khan concealed the said fact and submitted a
report in favour of mutation. Accused Palash Sheikh, acting as
Mutation Assistant, examined the papers, signed the proposal
and placed the same before the Assistant Commissioner
(Land).

The accused Minoz Saha and Gobinda Saha, though
possessing no right, title or interest in the said government
land, in collusion with each other and with dishonest intention,
created a forged deed being Deed No. 6025 dated 20.12.1969
of Boalmari Sub-Registry Office, falsely showing Nishikanta
Karmakar as donor and themselves as donees/transferees in
respect of the said 33 decimals of government land. Thereafter,
with the assistance and cooperation of the accused Md. Abdul
Kuddus Khan, the then acting Union Land Assistant Officer of
Parameshwardi Union Land Office, and accused Palash
Sheikh, Vested Property(VP)/Mutation Assistant of Upazila
Land Office, Boalmari, the said forged deed was submitted
before the Assistant Commissioner (Land), Boalmari Upazila
Land Office, Faridpur, and through Mutation Case No. A.C.(L)
IX-P-1-2316/2017-18 and U.L.O. No. IX-P-1-159/2017-18, an
attempt was made to mutate and record the said 33 decimals of
land under Plot No. 411 in proposed Khatian No. 1/1(61),
thereby attempting to misappropriate government property.

Upon requisition by the Anti-Corruption Commission,
the District Registrar, Faridpur, had issued a certified copy of

registered Deed No. 6025 of 1969. The supplied certified copy
disclosed that the actual deed bearing No. 6025 dated
20.12.1969 pertained to entirely different persons and property
showing Mariam Bibi as transferee and several others as
transferors in respect of 27 decimals of land situated at Mouza
Tongrail. Consequently, the deed submitted by accused Minoz
Saha and Gobinda Saha before the Land Office was found to
be false and forged.

Both accused Md. Abdul Kuddus Khan and Palash
Sheikh, instead of verifying the genuineness of the deed from
the concerned Sub-Registry Office, intentionally facilitated the
use of the forged deed, thereby assisting in the attempt to
misappropriate government land. Thus, all the accused persons,
in furtherance of their common intention and in collusion with
each other, committed offences punishable under Sections
409/420/467/468/471/109 of the Penal Code read with Section
5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
Upon closure of the investigation, the Investigating
Officer, Sardar Abul Bashar submitted charge sheet No. 04,
dated 20.07.2022, under Sections 409/420/467/468/471 and

109 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1947 against 3 accused-persons.
The case record was transmitted to the learned Special
Judge, Faridpur and registered as Special Case No. 09 of 2022.
The charge was framed on 10.01.2023 under Sections
409/468/471 and 109 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2)
of the Prevention of  Corruption Act, 1947, while the accusedpersons pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried when the
same
was
readout
and
explained
to
the
accused.
The prosecution examined 07 witnesses, while the defence
examined none. The accused-persons were examined under
Section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and once again
they pleaded innocence.
The learned Special Judge after completion of the
evidence, and on perusal of the same and upon hearing the
parties convicted the accused under Section 409 of Penal Code
with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, and
sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of
05(five) years and to pay a fine of Taka 10,000/- (ten thousand)
in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of

03(three) months and acquitted him of the charges under
Sections 468/471 and 109 of the Penal Code and also convicted
Minoj Saha under Section 468 and 471 of the Penal Code and
sentenced 07(seven) years simple imprisonment and to pay a
fine of Taka 50,000/- and acquitted Palash Sheikh of the
charges levelled against him.
Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment
and order of conviction and sentence, the convict preferred this
appeal before this Court.
Mr. Md. Shah Alam Sarker, the learned Advocate
appearing on behalf of the appellant, contends that the FIR is
defective as the copy writer, composer, and certified copy
issuer of the alleged deed were not made accused in this case;
as such, the conviction and sentence are not tenable in the eye
of law.
The learned Advocate contends that the AC land did not
direct the appellant whether to verify the deed was forged or
genuine, as the deed was produced from the Sub-Registrar’s
office with official seal and signature.

He submits that the Upazila Land Office, Boalmari,
Faridpur sent a copy to compare the said deed with registrar
volume and sub-registrar that the said deed was not in the
volume and after finding the report, the appellant proposed to
the A.C. Land to cancel the Mutation Case on 13.03.2019, by
this it is presumed that appellant has no power to see the same,
whether it was in volume or not but the Court without consider
the same convicted him, thus the conviction and sentence is not
tenable in eye of law.
He next submits the suit land falls under ‘Kha’ list of
Vested Property (VP) land and the concerned V.P. officer,
namely Palash Sheikh issued a report on 22.03.2018, which
runs as under:
 

 । 
  ।    
 !
   "

, $% &%
, %-(
	)
 *

 +,-
	& .
 *.*, 0, .* /
 2&

 *.* 340, .* 4

	
 33. (67) 77  

 9	2% :
 
33. 77  2
 ;

 <= 	>&  
।
But this accused was acquitted by the trial Court, who
stood on the same footing with the appellant. Since co-accused

Palash Sheikh having been acquitted, the appellant is also
entitled to acquittal on the principle of parity.
He further submits that the Government released the
‘Kha’ listed property in the year 2013 and thus the appellant
merely acted upon that legal position. He also contends that
accused Md. Kuddus Khan and Polash Sheikh went to
investigate the said land then they found the possession of the
accused Minoz Saha, and about possession of the said land, the
I.O. stated in cross-examination that Minoz Saha possessed the
said land.
He next submits that the Union Assistant Officer has no
power to finalise or order to make ‘Namjari Jamabag’, he can
only submit the documents filed by an applicant, and he has no
duty to verify the genuineness of documents, but the trial
Court, without considering the same, convicted him.
The learned Advocate further contends that the trial
Court convicted the appellant under Section 409 of the Penal
Code and Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1947 for the same alleged act, which amounts to double
jeopardy, which is legally impermissible.

The learned Advocate submits that the Anti-Corruption
Commission did not prove that the appellant is a beneficiary of
the disputed land and deed, so, conviction is not tenable in the
eye of law.
The learned Advocate finally prays for allowing the
appeal.
Per contra, Mr. Bivuti Tarofder, the learned Advocate
appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 2, contends that the
alleged deed is dated 20.12.1969, but it was produced for
mutation in 2018, after a lapse of 50 years but the appellant
forwarded the proposal for mutation without verifying and
ascertaining the genuineness of the deeds which is suspicious
and thus committing criminal misconduct.
He next submits that the allegations against the appellant
are proved by documentary evidence like Exhibit 11(9).
He next contends that the testimony of PW2 confirms
that the official copy of Deed No. 6025 of 1969 shows entirely
different parties and property.
He next contends that the original recorded owner, Nishi
Kanta Karmakar had migrated to India before 1969 and left no

heirs in Bangladesh. He could not have executed any deed in
1969. Therefore, the foundation of the mutation application is
fraudulent.
Mr. Tarofder contends that the accused Minoj Saha
applied for mutation in 2018 based on the alleged deed
executed in 1969, a gap of approximately 50 years. This delay
is not merely suspicious but also absurd and gives an inference
of fabrication.
He next argues that if the accused had genuinely
acquired title under a valid deed, in the ordinary course of
action, he would seek mutation within a reasonable time,
certainly within a few years, not half a century.
He further argues that no land development tax was paid
for this land by Minoj Saha and Gobindo Saha for 50 years.
The government record shows no payment was made by them.
This is impossible for a genuine owner to remain in possession
without paying the land development tax for such a long time.
He further submits that during the mutation proceedings,
the accused Minoj Saha and Gobindo Saha submitted their
NID card (Exhibit No. 3(3), 11(10) and 11(11)) and

documents. These documents established that in 1969, the year
of the alleged deed, Minoj Saha was approximately 9 (nine)
years old and Gobindo Saha was approximately 2 (two) years
old. A deed executed in favour of a 9-year-old child and a 2year-old infant is void ab initio for want of capacity to be part
of a contract.
Mr. Tarofder submits that the Union Land Assistant
Officer, Abdul Kuddus Khan was entrusted with the duty to
determine the original ownership of the property in question
under the guideline No. ‘Gha’. 1.2. ‘Dha’ of the Handbook for
AC (Land) prepared by the Land Reform Board, Ministry of
Land but he did not verify the ownership of the applicants and
submitted a report without any independent verification,
amounting to criminal misconduct.
He further submits that the role of the appellant
(statutory verifying authority) is fundamentally different from
the role of Palash Sheikh (no statutory duty) as such the
acquittal of Palash Sheikh does not entitle the appellant to
parity. Palash Sheikh had only a clerical role, whereas the
appellant had a statutory verifying role.

Learned Advocate contends that the impugned judgment
and order of conviction do not suffer from any illegality or
infirmity. He finally prays for dismissal of the appeal.
I have considered the submissions of the learned
Advocates for both sides, perused the evidence on record, the
impugned judgment and order passed by the trial Court and the
other materials on record.
For the proper adjudication of the matter and analysis of
the facts on record of the evidence of the prosecution is being
reviewed as follows:
PW1, Md. Abu Sayed, Deputy Director, Anti-Corruption
Commission, Head Office, Dhaka, deposed that the inquiry
revealed that 33 decimals of land under S.A. Plot No. 347, S.A.
Khatian No. 217 of Surjadia Mouza, belonged to one
Nishikanta Karmakar. Since the owner migrated to India,
leaving no legal heirs, the property was recorded as
Government khas land.

Accused Minoz Saha and Gobinda Saha forged Deed No.
6025, dated 20.12.1969. Abdul Kuddush Khan concealed
government records and recommended the mutation. Accused

Palash Sheikh (Mutation Assistant) marked the file as
‘verified’ without checking. Following the inquiry, he
submitted an inquiry report. He proved the First Information
Report (FIR) as Exhibit 2.

In cross-examination, he denied the suggestion that the
inquiry was flawed or that Deed No. 6025 was genuine.
PW2, Md. Yousuf Miah, Sub Registrar, Setakundu,
Chattogram, testified that pursuant to ACC’s requisition dated
26.02.2019, he supplied the certified copy (4 pages) of Deed
No. 6025 of 1969. He proved the same as Exhibit 4 Series. He
stated that the executants of the original deed were Siddheswar
Biswas and others, while the recipient was Mariam Bibi.

In cross-examination, he reaffirmed that the certified
copy was accurately generated from the official volume book
record.
PW3, Md. Golam Nabi Biswash, Office Assistant, Sub
Registry Office, Gopalganj, confirmed that the photocopy of
Deed No. 6025 accurately matched the original volume book
record.

PW4, Ms. Israt Jahan Zerin, Senior Assistant Secretary,
Cabinet Division, Dhaka, deposed that she transmitted a 14page comprehensive land report to ACC vide Memo No. 242
dated 14.02.2019, which confirmed government ownership.
She proved the report as Exhibit 8 series.
In cross-examination, she admitted that the data sent was
compiled from the records provided by the Boalmari Upazila
Land Office and the District Record Room.
PW5, Md. Kamal Mollah, Office Assistant, Deputy
Commissioner Officer, Faridpur deposed that the ACC official
prepared a seizure list for those items and returned them to his
custody under a Zimmanama.

He proved the seizure list as Exhibit 9, and his signature
as Exhibit 9/1. He also proved the Zimmanama dated
17/02/2022 as Exhibit 10.

In cross-examination, he stated that the Anti-Corruption
Commission office seized the papers from him.
PW6, Md. Abdus Salam, Upper Division Assistant, AntiCorruption Office, Faridpur deposed that during his posting at

ACC Faridpur, he witnessed the recovery and seizure of
evidence.

PW7, Sarder Abul Bashar, Assistant Director, the
investigating officer stated that he visited the place of
occurrence. He submitted charge sheet No. 04 dated
20.07.2022. He executed the formal seizures of records from
the Boalmari Land Office and District Registry Office. His
investigation corroborated that the land originally belonged to
Nishikanta Karmakar, and subsequently the land became
Government khas land upon his migration to India, and was
fraudulently mutated by Minoz Saha and Gobinda Saha using a
forged Deed No. 6025.

He stated that accused Abdul Kuddus Khan willfully
failed to conduct a physical inspection and provided a
fraudulent report to facilitate the mutation. The evidence
unerringly establishes that Deed No. 6025 of 1969, as
presented for mutation, was a forged document. The appellant,
as Union Land officer was duty bound to verify the geniunness
of the deed and the ownership status of the land. His failure to
do so, and his active submission of a report favouring mutation

seems to be clear indicia of forgery (including the 50 year
delay, minority of the alleged transferees, and government
record) which constitutes criminal misconduct.
In cross-examination, he categorically denied that the
investigation was biased or improper, asserting that the
schedule of the land was verified to be government property.
He proved the sanction letter as Exhibit 12.
Upon scrutiny of the evidence on record, it appears that
Minoj Saha and Gobinda Saha created forged deed No. 6025,
dated 20.12.1969 and thereafter on 15.04.2018 they submitted
an application before the Assistant Commissioner (Land),
Boalmari seeking mutation of the land in their names for
payment of land development tax. On 18.03.2018, the
Assistant Commissioner (Land) directed the Upazila Land
Assistant Officer, namely Abdul Kuddus Khan to submit a
report after reviewing the deed-documents and physical
possession of the land. Accordingly, the appellant submitted a
report as under:
(a) (% ? - 
 .
.* 
 Q§s¡¿¹l©−f
@7 &:।

(b) <- AB
 fÐaÉfÑZ & 7!
 3 *

D !
 !
  ‘2’ (% ? - AB
 

> <-  E 
।
(c) F G?%&
 <!72 4 H- //3
I. 
2
 3...4J.J3.KJ.-KJ

L
 
M 
6
 K
 <=N
 @	B
	 -7

 % /
 2&

 
O- >& ‘2’
ag¢pmi¥š² AB
 <- AB fÐaÉfÑZ & 7!

 3 -
 >&
 P P <-
 % E
&:।
(d) 

 @PQ  	%% j§−m @R & 9
	2% :
। 

 	S% 
 B >&
&
C।
(e) @P-  2 ‘’ ag¢pmi¥š² 9, <!;?M,

TU, >&(, 	B
, 	>&
 Vi¥š²,
*
 
 @W

 %
 AB
। C
%	7 


 9 X
 ‘2’ %i¥š² ।
%	7 X
 JDK
 YW
 43
 Z
¢m¢fhÜ :। C /
 2&
 i¥š²  ।

(f) @P-  


 %
 [ -
@&
 &।

Despite having full knowledge that the land appertaining
to BS Plot No. 411 and khas Khatian No. BS 1/1 which is
government khas land recorded in the name of the Deputy
Commissioner, Faridpur on behalf of the Government of
Bangladesh, accused Md. Abdul Kuddus Khan concealed the
fact and submitted the above-mentioned report in favour of
mutation.
The Land Reform Board, Ministry of Land published a
Handbook for AC (Land) wherein the role and responsibilities
of a Union Land Assistant Officer have been described in
Guideline No. O.1.2.Y (gha. 1.2. dha). The guideline is as
follows:
“C$
&
 F 
 --


! -

@
 (
 @
 @
%




 9 @R &:, 	2%  :,
	 
 @M % 
 *  qÙ¹¡¿¹l @Z&
= 
,  
 
 ]P- : 
,
 <(
 
^
_U 	>&
 % A`U 
,

	M  

 : 
 * a&  bc
 @d @
?

। @	



@d/ 
7 P% @d

 2&
 C$
&
 F

 -- ]e
 
 @	

 P 

7

 (F) 

 @
?

। ...”
The appellant, Abdul Kuddus Khan, was the Union Land
Assistant Officer. His role and responsibilities were expressly
defined above. He was responsible to independently verify the
original ownership of the property in question; examine
whether the deed was valid, registered, and genuine and
confirm whether the land was subject to any government claim
and to ascertain physical possession and payment of land
development tax. The appellant, under the aforesaid Handbook,
had the clear duty to verify the original ownership and
genuineness of the deed.
The appellant performed none of these duties. He
submitted a false report without any independent verification.
His act was not one of omission but of active commission with
dishonest intention.

Despite this glaring and fatal defect, the convict
appellant Abdul Kuddus Khan, in collusion with the private
accused and recommended mutation in their favour.
The passage of 50 years without any claim, mutation, tax
payment, or possession gives rise to suspicion of fabrication
and forgery and proves that the mutation application was
nothing but a fraudulent means of land grabbing.
The trial Court, upon careful evaluation of the evidence
and the applicable legal framework, found that Palash Sheikh
had no statutory duty under the relevant guidelines (Handbook
for AC Land) to verify the deed or report on the mutation
application. His role was primarily clerical or ancillary.
Consequently, even though he submitted a report, he could not
be held criminally liable for failure to perform a duty that did
not legally rest upon his office. The trial Court therefore
acquitted him.
The principle of parity does not apply where the roles
and statutory duties are different. The appellant was the
verifying authority under the Handbook for AC (Land), Palash

Sheikh performed a clerical role. The trial Court's acquittal of
Palash Sheikh does not entitle the appellant to acquittal.
The learned Advocate for the appellant contended that
the FIR is defective as the copy writer, composer, and certified
copy issuer of the alleged deed were not made accused in this
case; as such, the conviction and sentence is not tenable in the
eye of law. However, this Court finds no substance in the
contention. Because non-impleadment of certain persons does
not vitiate the FIR or the trial, so long as the core allegations
against the appellant are made out.
The conviction under Section 409 of the Penal Code
(criminal breach of trust by public servant) and Section 5(2) of
the Prevention of Corruption Act (criminal misconduct) does
not amount to double jeopardy, as the offences are distinct in
ingredients and the same set of facts may constitute both.
There is no bar to conviction under both provisions.
It transpires that the convict-appellant is not a habitual
offender and there is nothing on record to suggest that he has
any previous criminal antecedent and the appellant is about 60
years old.

Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and
the evidence on record, this Court is of the view that the ends
of justice would be best served if the sentence of the
substantive terms of imprisonment is reduced to the period
already undergone by the appellant and the fine while
maintaining the conviction.

Accordingly, the conviction of the appellant under
Section 409 of the Penal Code, 1860 read with Section 5(2) of
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 is hereby affirmed.
However, the sentence is modified. The sentence of rigorous
imprisonment for 05 (five) years is reduced to the period
already undergone by the appellant and the fine of Taka
10,000/- (ten thousand) is reduced to Taka 1,000/-(one
thousand), in default of payment the appellant shall suffer
simple imprisonment for a period of 01(one) month.

In the result, the appeal is dismissed with modification of
sentence indicated above.
The judgment and order dated 16.08.2023 passed by the
learned Special Judge (Senior District & Sessions Judge),
Special Judge Court, Faridpur in Special Case No. 09 of 2022

is hereby affirmed in respect of conviction and modified in
respect of sentence and fine as above.
The convict-appellant is released from his bail bond.
Let a copy of the judgment with the Lower Court
Records (LCR) be transmitted to the Court concerned
forthwith.

          (Md. Bashir Ullah, J)

[
Md. Sabuj Akan
Assistant Bench Officer.