Present:
Mr. Justice K.M. Kamrul Kader
And
Mr. Justice Md. Jabid Hossain

Death Reference No. 75 of 2018.
The State … Appellant

Md. Sohel Biswash
….Condemned-Prisoner
Criminal Appeal No.8266 of 2018
Md. Abul Hossain
               ………. Informant-appellant
The State & others ….....Respondents
Criminal Appeal No.7561 of 2018

Jail Appeal No. 212 of 2018
Md. Sohel Biswash
                     ........Convict- Appellant
The State                 ...... Respondent

Criminal Appeal No.7065 of 2018
Md. Abdus Samad
……….Convict-Appellant

The State        … ...... Respondent

Mr. Prokash Ranjan Biswas, D.A.G with
Mst. Tahera Khatun, and
Mr. Omar Faruk, A.A.Gs
….For the State.

Mr. Md. Munsurul Hoque Chowdhury,
Senior Advocate with
Mr. Zahirul Haque and

Mr. Mohammad Shafiqul Islam Ripon,
Advocates
….For the Condemned-Prisoner
(In Criminal Appeal No. 7561 of 2018 with
In Jail Appeal No. 212 of 2018)

Mr. Rafiqul Islam (Hiru), Advocate
….For the Informant-appellant
Mr. Md. Sawroar Hossain, with
Mr. Rowshan Alam Khan, Advocates
….For the acquitted-respondents
(In Criminal Appeal No. 8266 of 2018)

Mr. Rowshan Alam Khan, with
Mr. Md. Minarul Islam, Advocates
….For the convict-appellant
(In Criminal Appeal No. 7065 of 2018)

Heard On: 03.07.2025, 07.08.2025, & 14.08.2025
And
Judgment On : 11.12.2025.

K.M. Kamrul Kader, J:

This reference under section 374 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure has been made by the learned
Judge (Senior District and Sessions Judge) of the
Druto Bichar Tribunal, Rajshahi for confirmation of
the sentence of death passed on the condemnedprisoner namely Md. Sohel Biswash in Druto Bichar
Tribunal Case No.05 of 2017, arising out of
Chatmohor
Police
Station
Case
No.23
dated
25.06.2014, corresponding to G.R. No.123 of 2014,

convicting the condemned-prisoner under section 302
of the Penal Code and sentencing him to death with
fine of Taka 20,000/- only and further convicting him
under section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman
Ain, 2000 and sentencing him rigorous imprisonment
for life with fine of Taka 20,000/- only in default to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for 01(one) year more.
Against this judgment and order of conviction and
sentence dated 28.06.2018, the Convict-Appellant Md.
Sohel Biswash filed the Criminal Appeal being
No.7561 of 2018 and Jail Appeal being No.212 of
2018 before this court.
The learned Judge of the Druto Bichar Tribunal,
Rajshahi by his judgment and order dated 28.06.2018
acquitted the accused-respondents No. (1) Kabir
Hossain, (2) Mossammat Aysha Bewa and (3) Aziza
Akhtar Rupa passed in Druto Bichar Tribunal Case
No.05 of 2017 arising out of Chatmohor Police Station
Case No.23 dated 25.06.2014 corresponding to G.R.
No.123 of 2014 under sections 7/8/30 of the Nari-OShishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 along with sections

302/201/34 of the Penal Code. Against the judgment
and order of acquittal of 3 (three) co-accused dated
28.06.2018, the Informant Md. Abul Hossain as
Appellant filed a Criminal Appeal being No.8266 of
2018 before this court.

Co-accused Md. Abdus Samad against whom the
learned Judge of the Druto Bichar Tribunal, Rajshahi
convicting him under section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu
Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 and sentencing him
rigorous imprisonment for life with fine of Taka
20,000/-
only
default
suffer
rigorous
imprisonment for 01(one) year more. Against the
judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated
28.06.2018, the Convict Md. Abdus Samad as
Appellant filed a Criminal Appeal being No.7065 of
2018 before this court.

The Death Reference and these Appeals were
heard together and are being disposed of by this
single judgment.
The prosecution case, in shorts, are that one Md.
Abul
Hossain
Informant
lodged
First

Information Report (FIR) to the Officer-in-Charge of
the Chatmohor Police Station on 25.06.2014 alleging
interalia that accused persons along with 5/6
unknown accused have threatened the Informant on
several occasions, through various ways due to
previous enmity relating to land dispute with the
accused Nos. 1 and 4. They also threatened to kidnap
his son namely Md. Abdullah Al Noor, 4 (four) years
old boy, from mobile/cell-phone nos. 01863759734,
01755456569 and 01745680754.  He informed the
matter to Pabna RAB office. Thereafter on 25.06.2014,
in the morning, the informant was at ground floor of
their house and his wife Atia Parveen (32) and fatherin-law Md. Amir Hossain (60) were working at the
north side of the house. At that time, his son namely
Md. Abdullah-Al-Noor, was running in and around the
courtyard and inside of the house as well as on the
north side of the house next to the paved road and at
that time, he was eating peanut. Suddenly, at about
11:45 a.m. his son Md. Abdullah- Al-Noor was
missing and the Informant, his wife, father-in-law and

other relatives immediately started searching for his
son in all possible places and intimated the matter to
the local police station. When the police arrived,
everyone joined in and trying to find out whereabouts
he is and to rescue his son. At one stage, at about
3:45 p.m. the Informant received phone calls from
mobile/cell-phone SIM numbers 01766387589 and
his
mobile
SIM
number01768583848 and demanded ransom amounting to
Taka 15,00,000/= only from him and threatened to
kill his son, if he failed to pay the same to the
Kidnappers. The accused persons in connivance with
some unknown accused have kidnapped his son, due
to previous enmity in order to gain property and to
collect ransom money. As the Informant was busy in
searching his son and efforts are ongoing to rescue his
son and as such, there was a delay in filing the
complaint to the police station and the same was
recorded as Chatmohor Police Station Case No.23
dated 25.06.2014, under sections 7, 8 and 30 of the
Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000.

Sub-Inspector S.M. Moynuddin, as investigating
officer, investigated the case. During investigation, he
visited the place of occurrence, prepared a sketch map
with separate index, examined the witnesses and
recorded their statements under section 161 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, thereof seized alamots by
preparing seizure list and arrested FIR named
accused persons including three accused whose
names are come into the investigation and handed
over them to the court below. Thereafter, the
beheaded dead body of the Informant’s son, victim
Abdullah- Al-Noor, whose hands were severed from
his body was recovered on 27.06.2014 and sent the
same to the morgue for autopsy. Afterwards separate
head of the said victim was recovered on the next day
i.e. 28.06.2014 and sent it to the morgue for autopsy.
Next, the police arrested one Sohel Biswash, who is
not a F.I.R. named accused, he reside at the ground
floor of the house of the Informant as a tenant. He
sent accused Sohel Biswash to the Magistrate, 1st
class, cognizance court, on 01.07.2014, who recorded

his confessional statement under section 164 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure implicating one Abdus
Samad as a planner of the said kidnap of the victim.
He collected the confessional statement of the
condemned-prisoner Sohel Biswash. After conclusion
of the investigation, finding prima facie case against
the 5 (five) accused persons, he submitted the Charge
Sheet being No.165 dated 12.09.2014 under sections
7, 8 and 30 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain,
2000 along with sections 302, 201 and 34 of the Penal
Code and not sent up in Charge Sheet other 3 (three)
accused persons as he did not find any prima facie
case against them.
Thereafter, the case record was transmitted to
the Court of Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal
and the learned Judge of the said Tribunal passed an
order for further investigation of the case. Accordingly,
a supplementary Charge Sheet was submitted on
29.03.2016,
by
Investigating
Officer
under
sections 7, 8 and 30 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan

Daman Ain, 2000 read with sections 302, 201 and 34
of the Penal Code.
Thereafter, the case record was transmitted to
the Court of learned Judge of the Druto Bichar
Tribunal, Rajshahi for trial, who took cognizance of
the offence and the case was registered as Druto
Bichar Tribunal Case No.05 of 2017. At the
commencement of the trial, the learned Judge (Senior
District and Session Judge) of the Druto Bichar
Tribunal, Rajshahi framed charge under sections 7, 8
and 30 of the of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman
Ain, 2000 read with sections 302, 201 and 34 of the
Penal Code against 05(five) accused persons including
condemned-prisoner and it was read over to them, to
which they pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
During the trial, the prosecution examined as
many as 19 (Nineteen) witnesses to prove their case,
on the other hand, the defense examined none and
after conclusion of taking evidence, the condemned-
prisoner Sohel Biswash was examined under Section
342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, to which he

pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried and refused
to adduce any evidence in his support. But he
submitted a written statement. Other co-accused were
examined under Section 342 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, to which they pleaded not guilty and
claimed to be tried and they refused to adduce any
evidence in their support.
The defense case as it appears from the trend of
cross-examination is that the accused persons are
totally innocent and they have been falsely implicated
in this case out of previous enmity and on the basis of
mere suspicion. They are neither responsible nor
connected with the kidnapping and murder of
deceased
Abdullah-Al-Noor.
The
statement made by condemned- prisoner Sohel
Biswash was not true or made voluntarily and the
same was obtained by torturing him and he made this
statement under duress and the condemned-prisoner
is neither responsible nor connected with the murder
of deceased Abdullah-Al-Noor.

After conclusion of the trial, learned Judge
(Senior District and Sessions Judge) of the Druto
Bichar Tribunal, Rajshahi convicting the condemnedprisoner Sohel Biswash under section 302 of the
Penal Code and sentencing him to death with fine of
Taka 20,000/- only and further convicting him under
section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain,
2000 and sentencing him rigorous imprisonment for
life with fine of Taka 20,000/- only in default to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for 01(one) year more. The
learned Judge also convicting Md. Abdus Samad
under section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman
Ain, 2000 and sentencing him rigorous imprisonment
for life with fine of Taka 20,000/- only in default to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for 01(one) year more
and acquitted the accused (1) Kabir Hossain, (2)
from the charge leveled against them.
Mr. Prokash Ranjan Biswas, the learned Deputy
Attorney General with Ms. Tahera Khatun, Mr. Md.
Siddik Ali and Mr. Omar Faruk, the learned Assistant

Attorney Generals appearing for the State having
taken us through the impugned judgment and order,
FIR, charge sheet, depositions of the prosecution
witnesses and other materials on record made
submissions supporting the conviction and sentence
of the condemned- prisoners Sohel Biswash and
convict Md. Abdus Samad. Learned D.A.G. submits
prosecution
proved
its
case
beyond
reasonable doubt. All facts have been proved by
cogent, credible and reliable evidence adduced by the
prosecution witnesses. There is no contradiction in
their testimonies on any material point. He also
submits that the allegation against the condemnedprisoner Sohel Biswash made under section 302 of
the Penal Code and the allegations made against the
condemned-prisoner Sohel Biswash and convict Md.
Abdus Samad have been well proved by the
prosecution witnesses. He further submits that there
are specific allegations against the condemnedprisoner Sohel Biswash and convict Md. Abdus
Samad and the learned Judge of the Druto Bichar

Tribunal, Rajshahi passed this judgment and order of
conviction and sentence after considering the evidence
prosecution
witnesses
statement of the condemned-prisoner made under
section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The
condemned-prisoner Sohel Biswash also made a
confessional statement, wherein he confessed that he
along with Md. Abdus Samad brutally murdered and
kidnapped the deceased. He also narrated vivid
picture as to how and what manner the alleged
occurrence took place, which corroborated with the
other
independent
adduced
by
prosecution witnesses. He lastly submits that the
confessional statement made by the convict is
inculpatory in nature and it was made voluntarily and
the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate after complying
the  provisions of Sections 364 and 164 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure recorded the said confessional
statement of the condemned-prisoner, there is no
illegality and irregularity in the impugned judgment
and order of the conviction and sentence, as such, he

prays for upheld the conviction and sentence of the
condemned-prisoner Sohel Biswash and convict Md.
Abdus Samad and accept the Death Reference and
dismissed the Criminal Appeal being Nos.7561 of
2018 and 7065 of 2018 and Jail Appeal being No.212
of 2018.
Deputy Attorney General for the State placed reliance
on the decisions in the case of The State vs. Lalu Miah
and another reported in B.L.D. Vol. III (1987) AD page
212.
Mr. Rafiqul Islam (Hiru) learned Advocate
appeared on behalf of the Informant-appellant in
Criminal Appeal No. 8266 of 2018 submits that the
accused respondents namely (1) Kabir Hossain, (2)
were involved with this occurrence and their name
also disclosed by the prosecution witnesses in their
evidence, the prosecution proved its case beyond
reasonable doubt. He also submits that the informant
appellant successfully proved his case by adducing

cogent, credible and reliable evidence by producing
the necessary papers and documents; these are
exhibited before the Tribunal. All facts have been
proved by cogent, credible and reliable evidence
adduced by the prosecution witnesses. There is no
contradiction in their testimonies on any material
point but the learned Judge of the Druto Bichar
Tribunal, Rajshahi without considering the evidence
of prosecution witnesses acquitted the accused
respondents from the charge levelled against them by
his judgment and order dated 28.06.2018 and as
such, the same is liable to be set aside for ends of
justice in respect of the accused respondents. He also
submits that the police after investigation got huge
evidence against the accused respondents but the
learned Judge of the Druto Bichar Tribunal without
considering the same was pleased to acquit the
accused respondents. The learned Judge of the Druto
Bichar Tribunal, Rajshahi after considering the
evidence of prosecution witnesses convicted and
sentenced the accused No. 4 Md. Sohel Biswas to

death and also sentenced the accused No.1 Md.
Abdus Samad to imprisonment for life but the
accused Respondents who are on same footing
acquitted them by his Judgment and order dated
28.06.2018 and the Judgment and order of acquittal
contained no legal reason hence, the same is liable to
be set aside for ends of justice in respect of the
accused respondents. The informant appellant having
been succeeded in proving the charge leveled against
the accused respondents beyond all reasonable doubt
but the learned Judge of the Druto Bichar Tribunal
most illegally and erroneously acquitted the accused
respondents, which is not a proper judgment of
acquittal in the eye of law and the informant appellant
has seriously been prejudiced by the judgment and
order of acquittal dated 28.06.2018, in respect of the
accused respondents and as such, he prays for setting
aside the judgment and order of acquittal dated
28.06.2018, for the ends of justice.
Mr. Md. Munsurul Hoque Chowdhury, learned
Senior Counsel with Mr. Zahirul Haque and Mr.

Mohammad Shafiqul Islam Ripon appeared on behalf
of the condemned-prisoner Sohel Biswash and
submits that the impugned judgment and order of
conviction and sentence as passed by the learned
Judge of the Druto Bichar Tribunal, Rajshahi is
erroneous in law as well as on facts. He also submits
that condemned-prisoner Sohel Biswash is innocent
and the prosecution failed to prove the case beyond
reasonable doubt, as such, other co-accused namely
(1) Kabir Hossain, (2) Mossammat Aysha Bewa and (3)
Aziza Akhtar Rupa were acquitted by the trial court
below. He then submits that the learned Judge of the
Trial Court failed to appreciate the evidence and
materials on record in their true perspective and came
to an erroneous finding in convicting and sentencing
the appellant. He further submits that the learned
Judge of the trial Court has failed to appreciate that
there is no eye witness of the alleged occurrence. He
argued that the informant was examined as P.W.1 and
in his testimony, he categorically testified that a
beheaded dead body was found at about 3 (three) K.M

away from his house and he claimed to have identified
the dead body and stating that “Bj¡l ®R­ml j¡S¡u HL¢V L¡­m¡
lw p¤a¡l p­‰ ØV£­ml HL¢V a¡¢hS T¥m¡­e¡ Hhw qm¤c lw q¡g fÉ¡¾V a¡­a L¡VÑ¤­el
R¢h ¢Rm" and further starting “Bj¡l h¡s£ f¢ÕQj ¢c­L Ae¤j¡e 250 NS
c§­l L¡mi¡­VÑl Ešl f¡­nÄÑ f¢m¢b­el j­dÉ Bj¡l ®R­ml jÙ¹L f¡C” but
without identifying that the recovered head as his
son’s head and as such, learned Judge of the trial
court committed a serious error of fact and law in
accepting
P.W.-1
identification of the dead body of his son. He also
submits that the alleged occurrence took place on
25.06.2014 and the beheaded dead body of the victim
was recovered on 27.06.2014 which was found
decomposed
identification
was
absolutely
doubtful but the trial court shifted the onus upon the
defense to disprove the same taking denial from the
prosecution witness. He also submits that trial court
has failed to take judicial notice that alleged head
recovered on 28.06.2014 was neither identifiable nor
was identified by the father to be the head of his son.
Learned Judge of the trial court committed error of

law that the accused did not challenge the identity of
the dead body, the prosecution will get benefit of the
same, as it is settled principle of law that in a criminal
case, the prosecution alone has to prove the case
beyond any reasonable doubt and no onus lies upon
the defense. Learned Senior Counsel also submits
that all private prosecution witnesses are near
relatives and they did not corroborate with each other
on material points, there are contradiction and
discrepancy among the depositions of the witnesses.
The prosecution side seriously failed to produce any
neutral and independent witnesses in support of their
case. The prosecution failed to prove their case by
adducing any independent, disinterested witnesses
from neighbouring area and as such, convicting the
condemned prisoner relying on depositions of these
witnesses is unsafe and liable to be set aside. He
again submits that the learned Judge of the trial court
has failed to appreciate that the appellant was
arrested on 25.06.2014 and he was taken on remand
and after remand confession was recorded on

01.07.2014, which was neither voluntary nor true.
Except that so-called confessional statement, wherein
he did not admit about his participation in the killing
of the victim and there is no other evidence against
the appellant to prove his participation in the killing of
the victim. He again submits that the story of money
as disclosed in the confession for giving the motive
has not at all been proved by the prosecution and the
names of accused as disclosed in the confession was
not made accused in this case. The so-called
confession as extracted from the condemned-prisoner
Sohel Biswash was obtained under duress and
coercion. Subsequently, the same was retracted by the
appellant Sohel Biswash, which cannot be the sole
basis
conviction
without
any
independent
corroborative evidence. The learned Judge of the trial
court has failed to appreciate that the confession of
the appellant is absolutely an exculpatory one, except
that of act of screening evidence. He next submits that
the confessional statement of the condemned-prisoner
Sohel Biswash was not made voluntarily and it was

not true, it was obtained by torturing the condemnedprisoner and he made this statement under duress
and the learned Magistrate also failed to comply with
the provisions of Sections 364 and 164 of the Code of
while
recorded
confessional statement of the condemned-prisoner
Sohel Biswash. He again argued that the learned
Judge of the trial court has failed to take judicial
notice that according to F.I.R. the informant received
two mobile calls demanding ransom and though the
mobile numbers were given, but no investigation was
undertaken to ascertain about the mobile call and the
caller. The learned Judge of the trial court has failed
appreciate
investigation
agency
investigated the case in a very perfunctory manner.
He then submits that learned Judge of the trial court
committed an error of law in convicting the appellant
both under sections 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan
Daman Ain, 2000 (as amended in 2003) and also
under Section 302 of the Penal Code, when the two
offences are distinct and under two different laws and

when there is no evidence kidnapping against the
appellant before the alleged murder. He further
submits that there is no eye witness of the alleged
incident and there is no circumstantial evidence to
prove the prosecution case beyond reasonable doubt
and as such, it is case of no evidence. However, the
prosecution witnesses did not see the alleged incident.
As such, the condemned-prisoner should be acquitted
from the charge level against him. He prays for
rejecting the Death Reference and allowing both the
Appeal.
Learned Senior Advocate for the condemnedprisoner lastly submits that the conviction and
sentence passed by court below is severe, unsafe and
harsh especially in not considering the age of the
condemned-prisoners. Further condemned-prisoner
Sohel Biswash has been suffering in jail custody and
the condemned cell for a long period of time, if Your
Lordships are pleased to uphold the conviction and
sentence, in consideration of the above facts, then his

sentence may be commuted to imprisonment for life
instead of death.
Advocate for the appellant Sohel Biswash placed
reliance on the decisions in the cases of The State vs.
Babul Miah reported in 63, DLR (AD) (2011) Page 10,
Md. Humayun Kabir vs. The State reported in 74, DLR
(AD) (2022) Page 91, The State vs. Nuru Miah reported
in 05, ALR (AD) (2015) Page 97,Mizazul Islam vs. The
State reported in 41, DLR (AD) (1989) Page 157 and
Shahin vs. The State reported in 31, BLT (AD) (2023)
Page 405.
Mr. Rowshan Alam Khan, with Mr. Md. Minarul
Islam, learned Advocates appeared on behalf of the
convict-appellant Md. Abdus Samad in Criminal
Appeal No. 7065 of 2018, after taking us through the
entire evidence on record and submits at the very
outset that this is a case of no evidence; the convictappellant is innocent and he has been falsely
implicated in the case at the instance of a vested
quarter. He also submits that the learned Judge of the

Druto Bichar Tribunal, Rajshahi failed to appreciate
the evidence on record and came to a wrong finding
and erroneous decision, thereby convicted and
sentenced the appellant, which is not sustainable in
law. He further submits that all of the prosecution
witnesses are near relations and interested witnesses
and they made contradictory statement relating to the
time, place and manner of the occurrence and they
failed to corroborate each other on material points but
the learned Sessions Judge, relying upon unreliable
and interested witnesses convicted the appellant. He
next submits that immediately after lodging the F.I.R.
the beheaded dead body of the victim was recovered
on 27.06.2014, afterwards separate head of the victim
was recovered on the next day i.e. 28.06.2014. During
investigation, police arrested one Sohel Biswash on
27.06.2014, who was not F.I.R. named accused, but a
tenant of the Informant Abul Hussain, who reside at
the ground floor of the house of the informant. Local
Police forwarded him to the Court on 28.06.2014
along with prayed for 7(seven) days remand of the

accused persons including the appellant Abdus
Samad, Kabir Hossen and Zakirul Islam and after
hearing the parties, learned Magistrate was pleased to
allow two days remand of all accused persons namely
Sohel Biswash, Abdus Samad, Kabir Hussain and
Zakirul Islam. At that time, accused Md. Sohel
Biswash made a confessional statement under Section
164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure on 01.07.2014
implicating accused Abdus Samad as one of the
planner or conspirator for kidnapping the victim and
the confession of the appellant is absolutely an
exculpatory one, which cannot be used against other
co-accused. The confessional statement of Sohel
Biswash was not made voluntarily and it was not true,
it was obtained by torturing the condemned-prisoner
and the learned Magistrate also failed to comply with
the provisions of Sections 364 and 164 of the Code of
while
recorded
confessional statement of the condemned-prisoner
Sohel Biswash. The F.I.R. named accused persons
were suspected by the informant and no credible

witness found against them and the suspicion was
shifted
01.07.2014,
when
statement of Sohel Biswas was recorded. Confessional
statement and chain of the circumstantial evidence,
examination of the witnesses and other materials
produced by the prosecution completely failed to prove
the involvement of appellant Abdus Samad with the
alleged occurrence. The accused-appellant is no way
involved with this offence, nor is there any reason for
such involvement and as such, the convict-appellant
is entitled to be acquitted. Learned advocate also
submits that there is no ingredient of offence as
contemplated under section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu
Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 but the trial Court with
erroneous view and wrong findings convicted and
sentenced the appellant. He next submits that in
passing the impugned judgment and order the learned
Judge of the Tribunal seriously failed to consider that
the prosecution totally failed to prove their case by
adducing reliable oral and documentary evidence. He
next submits that the learned Judge of the Tribunal

did not believe the prosecution case and as such, he
acquitted other accused persons namely (1) Kabir
Hossain, (2) Mossammat Aysha Bewa and (3) Aziza
Akhtar Rupa however, he convicted and sentenced the
appellant on the basis of mere suspicion. Thus, the
conviction and sentence passed by the learned Judge
of the Druto Bichar Tribunal, Rajshahi is unsafe and
liable to be set aside and he prays for allowing the
appeal.
Advocate for the appellant placed reliance on the
decisions in the cases of Md. Emran Ali and others Vs. The
State 5 BLD (HCD) 95, Amir Hossain Hawlader Vs. The State 4
BLD (AD) 193 and The State Vs. Shafique 43 DLR 203 (AD).
Mr. Md. Sawroar Hossain with Mr. Rowshan
Alam Khan, learned Advocates appeared on behalf of
the acquitted-respondents namely (1) Kabir Hossain,
(2) Mossammat Aysha Bewa and (3) Aziza Akhtar
Rupa in Criminal Appeal No. 8266 of 2018, after taking
us through the entire evidence on record and submits
at the very outset that, this is a case of no evidence;

the acquitted-respondents are innocent and they have
been falsely implicated in the case at the instance of a
vested quarter. He then submits that the learned
Judge of the Trial Court, after considering and
appreciating the evidence and materials on record in
its true perspective acquitted respondents from the
charge levelled against them. He further submits that
all of the prosecution witnesses are near relations and
interested witnesses and they made contradictory
statement relating to the time, place and manner of
the occurrence and they failed to corroborate each
other on material points. Accused Md. Sohel Biswash
made a confessional statement under Section 164 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure on 01.07.2014, he did
not implicate the acquitted respondents with the
alleged incident of kidnapping and murder of the
victim. The acquitted-respondents   were F.I.R. named
accused persons and they were suspected by the
informant and no credible witness found against them
and the suspicion was shifted on 01.07.2014 when
the confessional statement of Sohel Biswas was

recorded. Confessional statement and chain of the
circumstantial evidence, examination of the witnesses
and other materials produced by the prosecution
completely failed to prove the involvement of the
acquitted respondents with the alleged occurrence.
The respondents are no way involved with this
offence, nor there do any reason for such involvement.
He lastly submits that there is no eye witness, the
prosecution witnesses did not see the alleged incident
and there is no circumstantial evidence to prove the
prosecution case beyond reasonable doubt, it is case
of no evidence and as such, the learned Judge of the
Tribunal after considering the evidence on record
acquitted respondents namely (1) Kabir Hossain, (2)
from the charge levelled against them. There is no
illegality and irregularity in the impugned judgment
and order of acquittal of the respondents and as such,
he prays for rejecting the Appeal.
Advocate for the appellant placed reliance on the

decisions in the cases of The State vs. Monu Miah and
others reported in 54 DLR (AD) 2002 page-60 and The State vs.
Jahangir Hussain Boga and Ors. reported in 13, ALR 2018
(part-2) page-01.
Before entering into the merit of the Death
Reference and these Appeals and to ascertain the
correctness or otherwise of the finding of the learned
Judge of the Tribunal, we are to discuss and assess
the evidence of the prosecution witnesses. Let us now
discuss the evidence of the prosecution witnesses one
after another.
P.W.1 Md. Abul Hossain is the Informant and
father of the deceased Abdullah-Al-Noor, aged about 4
years. This witness in his testimony testifies that on
25 June 2014, Wednesday, at about 11:45 a.m., he
was at his shop namely Abul Traders. At that time,
his wife Atiara Parveen and father-in-law Md. Amir
Hossain were making a trellis for pumpkin plant on
the south side of their house. This witness deposed
that his son the victim came to his shop at about
11:30 a.m. and he bought him some peanuts. He took

the peanuts and went toward his mother and at about
11:45 a.m. his wife came to his shop and asked him
whereabouts the victim Noor was? This witness told
her that Noor had gone to her. In reply, she said that
the victim Noor had left her and he was not with her.
Thereafter, they started searching for the child Noor.
This witness also deposed that his house is a twostoried building. The accused Sohel Biswas lived as a
tenant on the ground floor and on the northern side of
the ground floor; there was his rod and cement shop.
While searching, he knocked on the door of Sohel
Biswas’s residence and asked him, whether he had
seen Noor. Sohel replied that Noor had come to his
house and had asked for a banana, since he had no
banana in his house and as such, he could not give
him and then the victim Noor left. Shortly afterward,
Sohel locked his house and joined us in searching for
Noor. As they could not find out whereabouts his son,
he informed the matter to the Chatmohar Police
Station. This witness also deposed that on 25 June
2014, at about 3:45 p.m. he received a phone call on

his
mobile
phone
from
cell
phone
number
01716387589, an unknown caller told him that his
son Al Noor was with them and they demanded an
amount of Taka 15,00,000 (fifteen lakh taka) as
ransom otherwise, they would kill him. Thereafter,
about 10–15 minutes later, another call came from
mobile number 01721748364 to his mobile number
0168583848 and an unknown caller demanded an
amount of Taka 15,00,000 (fifteen lakh taka) only and
threatened to kill his son if the money was not paid
quickly. He immediately offered to pay an amount of
Taka 50,000, but they refused and told him that they
would accept nothing less than amounting to Taka
15,00,000
(fifteen
lakh
taka).
This
witness
immediately informed the police about these calls. As
his son was still missing, at about 9:15 p.m. on that
night, he lodged the First Information Report (FIR) to
the Chatmohar Police Station and he suspected that
accused persons namely Md. Abdus Samad, Kabir
Hossain, Alep Ali Molla, Most. Ayesha Bewa and
Jakirul Islam committed the offence as he had land

dispute with Abdus Samad and Ayesha Bewa. He
deposed that on 27 June 2014, at about 4:30 p.m.,
the police informed him over phone that a body had
been discovered in accumulated rainwater inside two
polythene bags on the southern side of the playground
of the Bhadra Government Primary School. The said
school is situated at approximately 2 (two) kilometers
west of his house. He immediately went there and saw
the body of a child lying in the southern part of the
school field. The body’s head had been severed and
missing, the hands had been cut off from the body,
the thighs had been cut off, and the abdomen had
been slashed open. Around the waist there was a steel
amulet tied with a black thread, and the body was
wearing a yellow half-pant with a cartoon image on it.
From the amulet and the half-pant, he identified the
body as that of his son, Abdullah-Al-Noor. The police
prepared an inquest report at the scene; he and other
persons present there signed it. The police then took
away the dead body. Thereafter, on 28 June 2014, the
police returned his son’s dead body and he buried the

headless body at Baluchar Graveyard. While he was
returning from the burial, he found he son’s severed
head wrapped in polythene on the northern side of a
culvert situated at approximately 250 yards west of
his house. He immediately informed the police and
they recovered the head of the victim and prepared
another inquest report. He further deposed that the
local police searched his house as well as the
residence of Sohel Biswas. This witness in his
testimony testifies that during the search of the
attached bathroom connected to Sohel’s bedroom, the
police recovered and seized several pieces of white
polythene which contained foul-smell, an 8-inch long
sharp knife and a yellow color school bag with a
broken zipper was found in a wet condition. The police
prepared a seizure list for those items. Later, on 28
June 2014, at about 5:00–6:00 p.m., the police
returned the head of the victim and he buried it in the
proper place in his son’s grave. He next deposed that
the head was recognizable and   identifiable as his
son’s head. He then deposed that after the police

came to his house on 25 June 2014, at that time,
accused Aziza Akhtar Rupa told his wife that “Why did
you inform the police? If you had not informed the
police, the child could have been recovered alive.” This
witness suspected that Rupa was connected with the
kidnapping of his child; otherwise, she would not have
made such a statement. He identified the accused
persons namely Sohel Biswas, Rupa, Abdus Samad,
Kabir Hossain, and Ayesha Bewa on the dock. He
identified the Ejaher which marked as Exhibit No.1
and his signature on it marked as Exhibit No.1/1. He
identified the Inquest Report of the dead body which
marked as Exhibit No.2 and his signature on it
marked as Exhibit No.2/1. This witness submitted 4
(four) photographs of his son Al Noor, both alive and
after death, these are marked as Material Exhibit No.I.
Bewa, this witness admitted that his father, Md.
Khabir Uddin got married three times and from his
first wife, he had two sons namely Md. Abul Hossain,

this witness and Jafar and two daughters namely
Kamela and Jamela, who were twins. Kamela’s
husband is accused Abdus Samad. Accused Kabir is
Kamela’s son. Ayesha Bewa is his father’s third wife.
During cross-examination this witness admitted that
the accused persons did not file any case against him.
Witness Amir Hossain is his father-in-law; Witness
Amir Hossain Minu is his uncle-in-law. Witness
Monirul Islam is his brother-in-law (i¡ul¡ i¡C). Witness
Imran is also his brother-in-law (nÉ¡mL), Witness Rafiqul
Islam is a neighbour. His father-in-law has one
brother and three sisters. He could not recall the
names of all his mother-in-laws and extended
relatives. He could not recall whether witness Rafique
was one of the grand sons of his mother-in-law.
Witness Sanaullah is his maternal brother. He could
not recall whether witness Lutfor was the brother of
his mother-in-law or not. He deposed that the house
of accused Abdus Samad is situated at approximately
500–600 yards eastern side of his house. At the time
of the incident, accused Ayesha Bewa was staying at

Abdus Samad’s house, although she normally lived in
Aringail Village, which is about 4–5 kilometers away
from his house. His shop is situated at about 20 yards
away from the main gate of his house, beside the
road. The body of the victim was recovered about 2
kilometers west of his house. He received information
from the police at about 4:30 p.m. and immediately
left for the said location. He reached there through a
van at about 4:45 p.m. He could not recall the name
of the van driver. He could not recall who typed the
FIR on a computer. During cross-examination this
witness admitted that he did not mention in the FIR
what clothes his son was wearing and the color/print
of those clothes, or he wore an amulet around his
waist and these clothes of the same color and design
and similar amulets are also available in the market.
He denied the suggestion that the recovered head had
no skin on it and the head was so decomposed it was
impossible
identify.
He
admitted
photographs he submitted to the Court, 3 (three) of
these photographs were taken by the police. He denied

the suggestion that he fabricated these photographs
for the purpose of this case. It is not true that the
body he buried could not be identified. He denied the
suggestion that he deposed falsely in this case.
accused Sohel Biswas, this witness admitted that he
lived in Greece for a long time. He deposed that
accused Abdus Samad went to Iran on his own
initiative from Bangladesh. This witness only helped
him so far related to his journey from Iran to Greece
and he stayed in Greece for about 7–8 years. He could
not recall the name of Abdus Samad’s younger
brother. He heard that he died. He denied the
suggestion that he took large sums of money from
many people and sent them to Greece. He denied the
suggestion that Abdus Samad’s younger brother died
after he went to Greece and failing to obtain any
employment. He denied the suggestion that many
people became his enemies because he took money
from them on the promise of sending them abroad
and he failed to do so. During cross-examination he

admitted that accused Sohel Biswas used to operate a
travel-related business. He had been living as a tenant
in his house since June 2013. He admitted that the
rented portion contained three rooms, accused Sohel
rented two rooms and a dining space and the
southern room was rented by an NGO. He could not
recall how many people from that NGO stayed there.
He admitted that at about 11:45 a.m., accused Sohel
joined us in searching for Noor. He could not recall
how long Sohel remained with him and accused Sohel
was not with him, at the time of the ransom calls
came to his phone. He denied the suggestion that he
was present at that time with him. He admitted that
the polythene bags may produced foul smell if fish or
other perishable items are kept in them for several
days. He denied the suggestion that the police failed
to recover any foul-smelling polythene, a sharp knife,
and a school bag from Sohel’s residence. He deposed
that at that time, he was present with the police. The
police searched the rented house including two
bathrooms on the northern side of the rented

premises. He denied the suggestion that the police
falsely claimed to have identified two bathrooms in the
rented house. This witness admitted that accused
Sohel was not a FIR named accused and he knew
some of the NGO workers namely Bayan, Rahim and
there are other two or three workers. He denied the
suggestion that accused Sohel had no involvement in
the kidnapping of his son. He deposed that the
primary school where Sohel’s wife worked is situated
about 400–500 yards from his house. This witness
admitted that the collapsible gate on the ground floor
remained open during the day and it was locked only
at night. This witness also admitted that the dead
body of the victim was found inside the two white
polythene bags in a water-logged area at the southern
side of the playground of Bhadra Government Primary
School and about one and half feet of water had
accumulated in the lower part of the field. He deposed
that the dead body was wearing a yellow half-pant
with a cartoon image on it. He denied the suggestion
that accused Sohel was not involved in the kidnapping

and murder of his son and he has been falsely
implicated in this case due to enmity. He denied the
suggestion that accused Sohel was innocent and
respectable young man.
that on 25 June 2014, at about 12:30–1:00 p.m., he
saw Rupa after she had returned from school. This
witness admitted that Accused Rupa was not a FIR
named accused. This witness admitted that he did not
mention in the FIR that during the search of Sohel’s
residence, Rupa, Sohel’s mother and Advocate Aziz
were present there and on 25 June 2014, accused
Rupa told his wife that “Why did you inform the
police? Had you not informed the police, the child
could have been recovered alive?” This witness
admitted that he heard that at the time of the murder
of his son, accused Rupa was at school and she went
to school at her usual time on the day of the
occurrence although, she returned before school
hours ended. He denied the suggestion that accused

Rupa has been implicated in this case merely because
of her husband Sohel was involved in the incident. He
denied the suggestion that he deposed falsely in this
case.
P.W.2, Most. Atiara Parveen is the Mother of
the deceased, Abdullah-Al-Noor and wife of the
Informant Md. Abul Hossain. This witness in her
testimony testifies that on 25 June 2014 her son Noor
was with her. At about 11:45 a.m. this witness and
her father were erecting a trellis for pumpkin plant on
the southern side of their house. Her husband was at
his rod-and-cement shop beside the road at the
northern side of the house. Noor was moving back
and forth between her and his father. His father
bought him peanuts and he was eating them. After
some time, she noticed that Noor was no longer beside
her and then she went to her husband and asked
whereabouts Noor was? Her husband replied that
Noor had gone to her. As she told him that Noor had
not come to her, at that time, they started searching
for him. Later, neighbors, relatives, and other local

people also joined the search. This witness deposed
that she knocked the door of the rented unit occupied
by the tenant Sohel Biswash, located at the northern
side of the ground floor of house and accused Sohel
told her that Noor had not come to his residence,
without opening the door of his home. She also
deposed that later on, she again knocked the door on
Sohel’s home, at that time, accused Sohel opened the
door and as she asked whether Noor was there, then
he said that Noor had come and asked for a banana,
but as there was no banana in the house, he could
not give him and then victim Noor left. Sohel then
came out, locked his door and joined in for searching
the victim Noor. This witness also deposed that her
husband informed the matter to the Chatmohar Police
Station over telephone. The police immediately arrived
in a vehicle and began searching for the child Noor.
This witness deposed that Sohel’s wife, accused Aziza
Akhtar Rupa used to work as a teacher of the
Government Primary School. At about 12:00 noon,
she returned from school and came to their house. At

that time, Rupa asked her, whether the police had
been informed. In reply she said that the local police
station had already been notified. At that time, Rupa
told her that: “Why did you inform the police? If you
had not informed the police, the child could have been
recovered alive. Now they will not return the child
alive.” Rupa repeated these words several times. She
also deposed that unknown person on several
occasion called her husband’s mobile phone from
mobile numbers 01716387589 and 01721748364 and
they demanded an amount of Taka 15,00,000 as
ransom and if the ransom was not paid, the child
would be killed. She also deposed that on 27 June
2014, at about 4:30 p.m., the police called her
husband on his mobile phone and informed him that
their child had been found. Her husband immediately
went to the Bhadra Government Primary School,
which situated at about 2 kilometers west of their
house, wherein a headless body wrapped in two
polythene bags accumulated with rainwater was
recovered at the southern side of the playground of

said school, the two hands had been severed from the
body, the legs had been cut below the thighs, the
abdomen had been cut open, and the legs had been
found folded and her husband identified the body of
the their son as he saw a steel amulet tied with a
black thread around his son’s waist and a yellow halfpant with a cartoon image on it, which his son was
wearing while he was missing. Thereafter, the police
took away the body. She deposed that on the evening
of 27 June 2014, at about 6:00 p.m., the police
arrested Sohel Biswash in front of their shop. This
witness deposed that on 28 June 2014, at about 5:25
p.m. while returning home after burial of their son,
people noticed foul smell near a culvert, which
situated at about 250 yards away from their house
and found her son’s head wrapped in white polythene
bag. Her husband saw the head and informed the
police. The police immediately arrived there and took
possession of the head. The police then came to the
residence
their
tenant
Sohel
Biswash
conducted a search. At that time, Rupa, Sohel’s

mother, and Advocate Aziz of Pabna were present
there. At that time, the police recovered several pieces
of polythene, which contained foul-smell, a sharp
knife approximately 8 inches long including the
handle and a wet yellow school bag with damaged
zippers from the attached bathroom of Sohel’s
bedroom. The police seized those items. The police
arrested Aziza Akhtar Rupa, locked the rented house
and took the key into police custody. Accused Ayesha
Bewa is her stepmother-in-law. She used to live in her
house. She was responsible for looking after their
lands and properties and she also kept the money
that was sent from abroad. When they returned to
Bangladesh and her husband asked accused Ayesha
Bewa to hand over the money and property, but she
refused to do so which led to disputes. The accused
Samad Biswash returned to Bangladesh from Greece
after about 7–8 months and accused Samad took
Ayesha Bewa away from her house and Ayesha Bewa
while leaving threatened her that she will see how she
will continue to live with her husband and children.

She suspected that Ayesha Bewa, Samad Biswash,
Kabir Biswash, Sohel Biswash, and Aziza Akhtar
Rupa conspired together to kidnap her son, they
demanded ransom, and then killed him. She identified
the accused persons namely Samad Biswash, Kabir
Biswash, Sohel Biswash, Ayesha Bewa, and Aziza
Akhtar Rupa on the dock.
Bewa, this witness admitted that she last saw her son
Noor at about 11:35 a.m. to 11:45 a.m. on
25.06.2014, thereafter she went to her husband and
asked
about
him
after
searching
for
approximately 15–20 minutes, they called the local
police, within 10 minutes after the call, the police had
arrived. She deposed that she along with her
neighbors and relatives searched the rooftop and in
and around of their two-story house, except Sohel’s
home, nearby ponds and surrounding areas. This
witness admitted that the police recorded her
statement. She deposed that Ayesha Bewa used to live

in their house and she was entrusted to look after
their land and money sent from abroad and as her
husband demanded to return the money and
properties then the disputes arose. She denied the
suggestion that she did not tell these matters to the
police. She denied the suggestion that she did not tell
the police that Samad returned from Greece after 7–8
months and took Ayesha Bewa away from her house
and Ayesha Bewa threatened that she would see how
this witness could live with her husband and children
and all the accused conspired together and kidnapped
her son. She denied the suggestion that she did not
tell the police that her son wore a steel amulet around
her waist and yellow shorts printed with cartoon
character. She denied the suggestion that she filed the
case on false allegation against Abdus Samad and
Ayesha Bewa because Samad supported Ayesha Bewa
and she was allegedly deprived of her share in the
properties. She denied the suggestion that she
deposed falsely in this case.

that at the time of the incident, she had one 9 (nine)
years old daughter and one son, the victim Noor. Her
daughter’s name is Sadikun Nahar Noori. She was a
fourth-grade student. The accused Rupa was a
teacher of the school where Noori studied. Sometimes
Noori went to school with accused Rupa. On the day
of the incident, Noori went to school at about 10:00
a.m. She returned home with her friends at about
11:55 a.m. Rupa returned home at about 12:00 noon.
She spoke with accused Rupa about five minutes after
she returned from school. Accused Rupa lived in her
rented house until she was arrest by the police. This
witness studied up to the tenth grade. She admitted
that the investigating officer recorded her statement at
about 7:00 p.m. on 25.06.2014 at her house, but she
does not know what exactly he wrote. She did not
suspect Rupa as an accused. She denied the
suggestion that she did not tell the police that Sohel’s
wife asked her whether she had informed the police.

In reply she told her that she had reported the matter
to the police station. At that point, Aziza Akhtar Rupa
allegedly said, “Oh no, why did you inform the police?
If you had not informed them, the child could have
been found alive. Now they will not return him alive.”
She admitted that Aziza Akhtar Rupa regularly
attended school and she used to go to Shalikha
Government Primary School at about 9:00 to 9:30
a.m. and the school is about 400–500 yards away
from her house. She denied the suggestion that on
18.10.2017, she implicated Aziza Akhtar Rupa. She
denied the suggestion that Rupa was not involved in
the kidnapping or murder of her son Noor. She denied
the suggestion that she deposed falsely in this case.
accused Sohel Biswash, this witness deposed that her
husband’s rod-and-cement shop is situated on the
northern side of their house, beside the paved road.
There are 5–6 other shops to the north and south of it
and their shop is on the southern side of the road. Her
father does not live in her house. He came to her

house, the day before the incident. This witness
deposed that the distance between her husband’s
shop and the pumpkin trellis is about 100 yards and
she began constructing the trellis at about 11:15 a.m.
Her husband opened the shop at about 7:00 a.m. and
at about 11:15 a.m., her son left the house with her,
at that time, he was eating peanuts and running
around. Her son was able to remove the shells himself
and was doing so while eating them. The peanuts had
been purchased by her husband about 10–15 minutes
before her son disappeared. She lastly saw her son
when he left her side. Her son used to come to his
father’s shop every day. She admitted that they had
other tenants, before Sohel became their tenant. Sohel
had a son namely Rafsan, who was about 5–6 years
old. Rafsan sometimes went to school with his
mother. She does not know whether he had been
formally admitted to school or attended regularly. She
denied the suggestion that she did not tell the police
that when she first knocked on Sohel’s door, she was
alone. As she knocked the door on second time, her

father, husband, and some neighbors were with her,
at that time, the police did not arrive yet and about 7–
8 minutes passed between the first and second knock.
The first time, Sohel did not open the door but said
from inside that Noor had not come there. The second
time, he opened the door and said that Noor had come
and asked for a banana, but since there were none, he
could not give him any banana and then Noor left the
place. Sohel then locked his room and joined us in
searching for Noor. This witness admitted that she did
not see her son’s severed head. She heard that it was
not
decomposed
completely.
She
denied
suggestion that the recovered head could not be
identified as it was so decomposed. The place where
her son’s head was found was about 2 kilometers
away from where the body was recovered. She denied
the suggestion that the recovered body and head were
unidentifiable. She deposed that the police arrested
accused Sohel first and then they searched his
residence. His bedroom had an attached bathroom on
the northern side and she was not present during the

search. She denied the suggestion that the police
falsely claimed to have recovered polythene bags
which contained foul-smell, a knife and a school bag
from Sohel’s bathroom. She heard that after Sohel’s
arrest, he became ill due to physical torture and he
was taken to a hospital for treatment, but that was
not true. She denied the suggestion that the police
arrested Sohel under the influence of his enemies. She
denied the suggestion that she never knocked on
Sohel’s door first alone and later with her father and
husband, or that Sohel never said Noor had come
asking for a banana but left because there were none.
She denied the suggestion that her husband used to
send people abroad and he misappropriated money
from many people under that pretext, thereby creating
enemies. She denied the suggestion that the alleged
incident never occurred on the alleged date, time, and
place. She denied the suggestion that she deposed
P.W.3 Md. Monirul Islam is the brother-in-law
of the Informant Abul Hossain, in his testimony

testifies that on 25.06.2014, at about 12:00 p.m., his
brother-in-law informed him that Abdullah-Al-Noor
was missing and at about 12:30 p.m., he came to his
brother-in-law’s house. They kept looking for Noor but
they could not find him. He deposed that at 3:45 p.m.
a phone call came from an unknown number to Abul
Hossain and on that phone call, an amount of Taka
15,00,000/- was demanded as ransom, otherwise, Al
Noor would be killed and at that time, he was with
Abul Hossain. He deposed that on 27.06.14, at about
4.30 p.m., the police called Abul Hossain over phone
and informed him that Al-Noor's body was found near
the Bhadra Government Primary School grounds.
They together went to the southern side of the said
Primary School playground from where the headless
body was recovered in polythene packets, both hands
and legs were cut off, the stomach was cut. He
deposed that the body was wearing yellow half pant
with cartoon image on it and a black thread and a
steel amulet. This witness deposed that Abul Hossain
saw all this and identified the body as Al-Noor's body.

The body was examined by the police and prepared
inquest
report
sent
it
for
post-mortem
examination. The body was buried after the postmortem examination. After the burial, on their way
back home, they found severed head wrapped in
polythene on the northern side of a culvert situated at
approximately 250 yards west of the informant house.
They immediately informed the police and they
recovered the head of the victim and prepared another
inquest report. The police also seized the polythene on
28.06.14 and prepared a seizure list. He identified the
seizure list, which marked as Exhibit No.3 and his
signature on it marked as Exhibit 3/1.
Accused persons declined to cross-examination
him.
P.W.4 Sukumar Gomez deposed that deposed
that on 27.06.14 at about 3.30 to 4.00 p.m. he came
to know that a headless body wrapped with polythene
was found in approximately 1 (one) feet deep water on
the southern side of the Bhadra Primary School field
and both the hands, stomach and thighs of both legs

of the body were cut off. He went there and saw the
body was wearing yellow shorts with cartoon image on
it and a steel amulet with black thread. The child's
father identified the body. The Police prepared the
Inquest report of the body. He identified the Inquest
Report, which marked as Exhibit No.2 and his
signature on it marked as Exhibit 2/2. Later, he
heard from the Informant that Sohel, Rupa, Samad,
Kabir were involved with this incident.
accused Aziza Akhtar Rupa, this witness denied the
suggestion that he did not hear anything from the
Informant.
accused Sohel Biswash, this witness denied the
suggestion that the Informant did not tell him Sohel
was involved in this murder.
Bewa, this witness deposed that the police recorded
his statement on the day, the body was recovered. He

denied the suggestion that the Informant did not tell
him Samad, Kabir, Sohel, Rupa were involved in this
incident of murder. He denied the suggestion that he
deposed falsely in this case.
P.W.5 Md. Rezaul Karim alias Babu deposed
that on 27 June 2014, he saw people running toward
the playground of Bhadra Primary School. After some
time, he went there and saw a headless dead body
lying on the southern side of the field in several
polythene bags. The police opened the polythene bags
and saw the body had no head; both the hands had
also
been
severed
were
lying
separately.
Thereafter, Noor’s father arrived and he identified the
body as his son, Al-Noor by looking at the half-pants
worn on the body and an amulet tied around the waist
with a black thread. The police seized some white
polythene bags which contained foul-smell and the
amulet. He identified the seizure list dated 27 June
2014, which marked as Exhibit No.4 and his
signature on it marked as Exhibit 4/1. The police
prepared the Inquest Report of the headless dead

body in his presence. He identified the Inquest Report,
which marked as Exhibit No.2 and his signature on it
marked as Exhibit 2/3. He deposed that as he asked
the Informant who could have committed such an
act? In reply, he was crying and said that “My own
relatives have done this.” He deposed that the
Informant mentioned the names of Samad, Sohel, and
Kabir. He could not recall whether he mentioned any
other name. He identified the seized white polythene
bag, which marked as Material Exhibit No.II.
Accused Aziza Akhtar Rupa declined to crossexamination him.

Bewa, this witness deposed that the place where the
body was found is less than half kilometer away from
his house. He denied the suggestion that his house is
3 (three) kilometers away from that place. He denied
the suggestion that the Informant did not mention the
names of accused Samad, Sohel, and Kabir. He denied
the suggestion that he deposed falsely in this case.

accused Sohel Biswash, this witness deposed that the
accused Sohel is his distant relative but he could not
recall the name of Sohel’s village. He denied the
suggestion that he deposed falsely in this case.
P.W.6 Md. Jahangir Alam in his testimony
testifies that on 27.06.2014, at about 4.30 p.m., he
was at his shop situated at Chatmohar Bypass
Intersection. At that time, he heard from the passersby that a child's body was lying on the ground of
Bhadra Primary School. He went there and saw a
headless body is lying in an open area on the
southren side of the field; both the hands had also
been severed and were lying separately. He heard that
the dead body was in polythene bags. The child's
stomach was cut and both legs were cut off and folded
near the waist, the dead body was wearing a yellow
short pant and a steel amulet with a black thread
around his waist. The police prepared the inquest
report of the body and took his signature on it. The
police seized some white polythene and a steel amulet

and prepared the seizure list. He identified his
signature in the seizure list which marked as Exhibit
No. 4/2. He heard, Noor's father telling everyone that
his tenants Sohail and Rupa, and other accused
namely Samad, Kabir, Ayesha were involved with this
incident of murder.
During cross-examination by the accused Aziza
Akhtar Rupa this witness deposed that the police
recorded his statement on 25.08.14. He denied the
suggestion that Noor's father did not tell, his tenants’
namely Sohail and Rupa, and other accused namely
Samad, Kabir and Ayesha were involved with this
incident of murder.
All the accused persons adopted the crossexamination.
P.W.7 Md. Amir Hossain Minu in his testimony
testifies that on 25.06.2014, at around 12:00 o-clock
(noon) his niece’s husband namely Abul Hossain
informed him that Noor was missing. He went to the
house of Abul Hossain and at 3:45 p.m., an unknown
number called on Abul's phone and told him that they

had kidnapped Noor and demanded an amount of
Taka 15,00,000/- as ransom  otherwise, they will kill
Noor. He also heard the conversation on loudspeaker.
The Informant Abul suspected that his stepmother
Ayesha, Samad and Kabir are the ones who took away
his child. This witness further deposed that on
27.06.14, at about 4.30 p.m. Abul Hossain informed
him that a dead body of child was found at the
southern side of the ground of Bhadra Primary
School, he went there and saw the headless dead body
of the child lying there, his both hands, stomach and
both legs were cut off and folded. The dead body was
wearing yellow shorts with cartoon image on it and a
steel amulet around his waist. The police took the
child's body and sent the same to the hospital
morgue. This witness also deposed that on 28.06.14,
at about 3.30 p.m., the body was taken to the
Baluchar Cemetery for burial. After the burial, on
their way back home, Noor's severed head was found
inside a polythene bag at the northern side of a
culvert, which situated at approximately 250 yards

west of the Abul's house and the head was taken out
from the polythene. There was hair on the head. The
mouth was open, there were teeth. Noor was identified
by looking at the face. This witness realized that
Sohel, Rupa, Samad, Kabir, Ayesha had kidnapped
this child in collusion with each other. They killed the
child as they failed to receive the ransom amounting
to Taka 15,00,000/-. He further deposed that the
police prepared the Inquest Report of the recovered
head in his presence. He identified the Inquest Report,
which marked as Exhibit No.5 and his signature on it
marked as Exhibit 5/1. The police also seized the
polythene bag and prepared the seizure list. He
identified his signature in the seizure list, which
marked as Exhibit No.3/2. He next deposed that the
police searched the rented house of accused Sohail. At
that time, he was there and saw that the police seized
a wet school bag lying in a corner of the house which
contains foul smell, several polythene bags were also
found next to it and a sharp knife was also recovered
beside the bag. He then deposed that Abul told him,

accused Sohel, Rupa, Ayesha and Samad were the
persons who had kidnapped and killed his son.
During cross-examination on behalf of accused
Sohel, this witness admitted that his house is situated
5 K.M. away from the Informant’s house. He used to
work at Agro Equipment Ltd. His office was situated
in Rajshahi. He used to do his office work (marketing)
from his home and once a month, he went to
Rajshahi. He saw Noor's body on the school ground.
The head was found 10 yards away from the paved
road. He admitted that in the seizure list dated
28.06.14, there was no mention of Noor's severed
head was wrapped in that polythene. He denied the
suggestion that he was not present when the police
searched the house of Sohel and no school bag, knife
or polythene were recovered and seized in his
presence. He denied the suggestion that he did not
mention any name of the accused persons to the
police. He denied the suggestion that he deposed

P.W.8 Md. Lutfar Sarkar deposed that on
27.06.14 at about 4.30-5.00 p.m. in the afternoon, he
heard that the headless body of missing child namely
Abdullah Noor was found near the Bhadra School
ground and on the following day, i.e. 28.06.14, he
went to Chatmohar Bus Stand and on his way back
from the bus stand, he saw a crowd gathered on the
western side of Haran Intersection, on quarry, he
came to know that the head of the missing boy was
found, he saw the head inside a polythene bag and
various parts of the deceased's face were decomposed.
He also deposed that the police prepared the Inquest
Report of the severed head in his presence. He
identified the Inquest Report, which marked as
Exhibit No.5 and his signature on it marked as
Exhibit 5/2. He heard from Abul Hossain that his
infant son had been killed by his tenant Sohel and his
wife Rupa. Later, Abul Hossain again informed him
that Samad, Kabir and his stepmother Ayesha had
committed the murder. He did not know the accused
persons.

During cross-examination by the accused Aziza
Akhtar Rupa this witness deposed that he signed the
Inquest Report and the police recorded his statement
on 28.06.14 not on 08.07.14. He admitted that he did
not disclose the names of the accused persons to the
Investigating Officer.
During cross-examination by the accused Abdus
Samad, Kabir Hossain, and Ayesha Bewa, this witness
deposed that he knew Abul Hossain for the last 3½
years. He denied the suggestion that he heard from a
passer-by that the child was missing. He also denied
the suggestion that he deposed falsely in this case as
the Informant is his relative.
During cross-examination by the accused Sohel,
this witness admitted that he did not tell the police
that he heard from Abul Hossain, his tenant Sohel
and his wife had killed Noor.
P.W.9 Md. Amir Hossain is the father-in-law of
the Informant Abul Hossain. This witness in his
deposition deposed that on 25.06.2014 at 11.45 a.m.,
he was at the house of his daughter Atiara Parveen. At

that time, he and his daughter Atiara were erecting a
trellis for pumpkin plant at backyard of his son-inlaw's house. At that time, his grandson Abdullah-AlNoor was playing in front of the house and he was
eating nuts. Suddenly, at 11.45 am, Noor want
missing and they searched to find out whereabouts he
was but could not find him. Thereafter, he knocked on
the door of accused Sohel Biswash's home, as he
opened the door; this witness asked him whether he
had seen Noor? In reply, Sohel said that he did not
see him. They have been searching for him at different
places time and again and also went to Sohel's house
again. At that time, Sohel said Noor did came to his
house and asked for bananas, but he could not give it
to him, then Noor left. Thereafter, his son-in-law
informed the matter to the local police and they came
to the place of occurrence within few minutes, but
they could not find out whereabouts Noor was. This
witness also deposed that on 25.06.14, at 3.45 p.m.
unknown person called on his son-in-law’s mobile
phone and demanded an amount of Taka 15,00,000/=

as ransom and if the ransom was not paid, the child
would be killed. His son-in-law requested them not to
kill him and he was willing to pay amounting to Taka
5,00,000 only. He also deposed that on 27 June 2014,
the police informed his son-in-law over telephone that
a headless child body, both the hands were severed
from the body, both the legs were cut off on the
thighs, the abdomen was cut open was found at the
southern side of the Bhadra Government Primary
School’s playground. This witness and his son-in-law
immediately went there and saw the body. The police
arrested the accused Sohel in front of his son-in-law's
shop. He deposed that on 28.06.14, the headless body
was buried in the Baluchar graveyard, while he was
returning from the burial, after smelling a very foul
smell at about 10 yard away from the side of the road;
he went down and saw the head was wrapped in white
polythene like a ball. He himself took out the head
from inside of the polythene and found that it was
decomposed in various places of the head and face.
He saw all teeth of his upper gum and 2 on his lower

gum. Then he informed the police and they came
there and took the head into their custody. He further
deposed that the local police searched the house of
Sohel Biswash in his presence and at that time; the
police recovered and seized an 8-inch long sharp
knife, a wet school bag with broken zipper and several
pieces of polythene from the attached bathroom,
which contained very strong foul-smell.  He deposed
that accused Sohel, his wife Rupa, Samad, Kabir and
Ayesha in connivance with each other kidnapped and
killed the victim Abdullah Al-Nur. He identified the
accused Sohel, Kabir, Samad, Ayesha and Rupa on
the dock.
accused Sohel Biswash, this witness admitted that
Abul Hossain's house is situated 6 miles away from
his village home. They started erecting the trellis for
pumpkin plant at 9:00 a.m. The shop of his son-inlaw was open from 8:00 a.m. He deposed that Noor
started playing from 8:00 a.m. and he was with them
at 11:15 am and then he went to his father.  He also

deposed that the police arrived there at about 12:00
a.m. at noon, before the police arrived; they knocked
on the door of Sohel's house twice. He could not recall
when the first or second time he knock on the Sohel's
door; but the time between the two knocks would not
have been 1(one) hour. He denied the suggestion that
Sohel's bedroom did not have an attached bathroom.
He denied the suggestion that the bag, polythene and
knife were not recovered from the attached bathroom.
He denied the suggestion that he did not tell the police
that he knocked on the door of Sohel's house or Sohel
informed him that Noor was not at his house or when
he went to Sohel's house second time, Sohel said that
Noor had come to his house but he left because he
could not give him bananas.
accused Rupa, this witness admitted that this
witness, Abul Hossain and his daughter Atiya have
decided to file the case together and who would have
been made accused. This witness also admitted that
on the date of incident, accused Rupa went to school

in the morning. His grandson Noor did not go to
school. He met Rupa after she was returning from
school at about 12:00 a.m. on that day. He admitted
that Aziza Akhter Rupa was not F.I.R. named accused.
He denied the suggestion that Rupa was made
accused on the basis of false allegation as the police
seized goods from her rented house.
Bewa, this witness admitted that on 25.06.14, at
around 12:00 noon, the police came to his son-inlaw’s house. He could not recall the name of the police
officer. He denied the suggestion that he deposed
falsely in this case against Samad, Kabir, and Ayesha
as per instruction of his son-in-law
P.W.10 Md. Imran Hossain deposed that the
victim, Abdullah Al Noor is his nephew. The incident
took place on 25.06.2014 and on that morning, at
about 11.50 a.m. his sister informed him over
telephone that Noor want missing and after hearing
the news, he want to his sister's house. At around

3.45 p.m, an unknown person called his brother-inlaw Md. Abul Hossain's phone and demanding an
amount of Taka 15,00,000/- as ransom and if he do
not pay, they would kill Noor. Later, the number was
found switched off. He deposed that on 27.06.14, at
around 4.30 p.m. Noor's headless body with both the
hands severed and his stomach cut off was found on
the playground of Bhadra Government Primary
School. Noor's body was identified by seeing that he
was wearing yellow shorts with cartoon image on it
and a black thread tied around his waist with an
amulet. The police took the body for autopsy. He went
to his sister's house. On that evening, at around 6.006.30 p.m. the police arrested Sohel Biswash inside his
brother-in-law’s shop. He also deposed that on the
next day, i.e. on 28.06.14, while he was returning
home, after the burial of the victim at the Baluchar
graveyard, Noor's head was found wrapped in
polythene at about 10/15 yards away at the north
side of the culvert, which situated at about 250 yards
away from his sister's house. Thereafter, the police

were informed and they recovered the severed head.
He also deposed that the police searched the Sohel
Biswash's house, at that time, the accused Aziza
Akhtar Rupa, Sohel Biswash's mother and Advocate
Abdul Aziz of Pabna were present there. During the
search, the police recovered and seized a knife with
handle estimated 8 inches long, a smelly old school
bag; some smelly white polythene bags from the
attached bathroom of Sohel's house. The police
prepared the seizure list. He identified the seizure list,
which marked as Exhibit No.6 and his signature on it
marked as Exhibit 6/1. He identified the knife, the
used school bag and some white polythene bags; these
are marked as Material Exhibits-III, IV and V series.
During cross-examination by the accused Abdus
Samad, Kabir Hossain and Ayesha Bewa, this witness
admitted that on 25.06.14, at about 1.30 p.m. he
reached his sister's house. They searched for Noor in
the vicinity of the house including the pond, in and
around the house. He deposed that the investigating
officer recorded his statement within 1 or 2 days after

recovery of the victim Noor's body. He told the police
that he heard from his sister that Noor was missing
and at 3.45 p.m., an unknown person from an
unknown phone called his brother-in-law and he tried
to contact with that number. He denied the suggestion
that he did not tell the Investigating Officer that Noor
was wearing yellow shorts with cartoon image on it or
Noor's severed head was found next to the culvert or
during the search of the house of Sohel and the
accused Aziza Akhtar Rupa, Sohel Biswash's mother
and Advocate Abdul Aziz of Pabna were present there.
He also denied the suggestion that he did not tell the
Investigating Officer that the knife, school bag and
polythene bags were recovered from the attached
bathroom
Sohel's
bedroom.
He
denied
suggestion that he deposed falsely in this case as per
instruction of his brother-in-law.
accused Rupa, this witness admitted that he knows
Aziza Akhter Rupa is a teacher. He did not see Rupa
when he first went to his sister's house. He admitted

that there was no blood on the knife, school bag or in
the polythene bags. He also denied the suggestion
that he did not see the recovery of the knife, school
bag and polythene bags from the bathroom. He denied
the suggestion that he deposed falsely in this case as
tutored by his sister.
P.W.11 Md. Sonaullah in his deposition deposed
that the Informant Abul Hossain told him that
someone called him 2/3 days before the incident i.e.
25.06.2014 and demanded ransom and if he failed to
give the money, they would kill his son. He deposed
that on 25.06.14, he came to know that Abul
Hossain's son was missing and on 27.06.14, at about
04:35 p.m., he heard that a headless body was found
at the ground of Bhadra Primary School and he went
there. The Informant identified the body as his son
Noor. The police examined the body and sent it for
autopsy. He also deposed that on 28.06.14, at about
05:00 p.m. while he was returning from the burial of
the victim, after having unpleasant foul smell coming
from the northern side of the culvert, they searched

the area and upon searching Noor's head was found
wrapped in a polythene bag. Thereafter, the police
were informed and they recovered the head and
prepared the Inquest Report. He identified his
signature in the Inquest Report, which marked as
Exhibit No.5/3. He also deposed that the police
searched the Sohel Biswash's house, during the
search, the police recovered and seized a knife with
handle estimated 8 inches long, a smelly old school
bag; some smelly white polythene bags from the
attached bathroom of Sohel's house. The police
prepared the seizure list. He identified his signature in
the seizure list, which marked as Exhibit 6/2.
accused Sohel, this witness admitted that his house is
situated at about 2 to 2 ½ K.M. away from the place of
occurrence. He denied the suggestion that the police
did not recover and seize a knife, a school bag and
smelly polythene from Sohel Biswash's room in his
presence. He admitted that Abul Hossain is my
uncle's brother. He denied the suggestion that no

search was conducted at Sohel Biswash's house on
28.06.14. He denied the suggestion that he deposed
P.W.12 Dr. Md. Rezaul Karim in his testimony
testified that he held autopsy on the body of the
deceased Abdullah Al Noor aged about 4 years,
brought and identified by Chatmohar Police Station
Constable No.1014, Md. Humayun Kabir. The dead
body was found in 3 (three) parts:
Body is putrefacted three pieces
(1) Trunk with lower extremity without head.
(11) Right upper extremity.
(III) Left upper extremity. All parts belong to
same body extremity fit properly with Trunk and skin
color similar.
The Medical Board found the following external
injuries:-
(1) Multiple incised wound on neck separating
head from the Trunk.

(II) Multiple incised wound separating right
upper extremity from the trunk at its Junction
with extremity.
(3) Multiple incised wound separating left upper
extremity from the trunk at its Junction with
extremity.
(4) Incised wound, size whole breadth of
abdomen 4.1" x3" on mid abdomen.
(5) Incised wound, size 4"x1" x 2 ½" anterior
aspects of left thigh near its Junction with the
trunk.
(6) Incised wound 4"x1"x2" anterior aspect of
right thigh near its junction with the trunk.
On discussion –all internal organs were found
putrefacted other finding found on dissection
has been mentioned above, whether the above
mentioned wounds were anti-mortem or post
mortem could not be determined because of
advanced putrefaction
The Board opined that cause of death could not
be determined because of advanced putrefaction.

He identified the post mortem report, which
marked as Exhibit No.7 and his signature on it
marked as Exhibit No. 7/1. He deposed that this
autopsy was conducted through the Board and Dr.
Shipan Kumar Das signed this report in his presence.
He identified the signature of Dr. Shipan Kumar Das,
which marked as Exhibit No. 7/2.
accused Sohel, this witness admitted that there would
be a different situation, between the dismemberment
of the body with a weapon after death by suffocation
and dismemberment with a weapon while the person
is alive. He admitted that sharp weapons could be
various types. However, he did not mention what type
of weapon was used in this incident. He also admitted
that he could not give any specific opinion about the
cause of death.
P.W.13 Abu Saleh Md. Salah Uddin Khan,
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Pabna who
recorded the confessional statement of the accused
Md. Sohel Biswash on 01.07.2014. This witness

deposed that after observing all statutory formalities
he recorded the statement of the accused Md. Sohel
Biswash, which marked as Exhibit No.8 and his 06
(six)  signatures on it marked as Exhibit No. 8/1
series. He deposed that accused Md. Sohel Biswash
put 12 (twelve) signatures in the statement in his
presence. He identified the signature of accused Md.
Sohel Biswash, which marked as Exhibit No. 8/Ka
series. He also deposed that after recording the
statement of accused, he certified that accused Md.
Sohel Biswash voluntarily made the true statement.
accused Sohel, this witness admitted that the accused
was arrested on 27.06.14 at 19.00 hours but he did
not record any explanation as to where the accused
was kept for the last four days before the accused was
presented to him. He admitted that he did not ask any
questions as to how long the accused was kept in
police custody and he did not ask any questions as to
why the accused is pleading guilty. He also deposed
that he recorded the statement in his private room. He

denied the suggestion that the police have tortured
the accused, during the period of police custody. He
further denied the suggestion that the statement was
not made voluntarily and true.
that the accused stated in his statement, his wife was
at school at the time and when she was informed
about Noor's disappearance, she returned home with
her son from school a shorts while later.
P.W.14 Dr. Md. Kamal Osman in his testimony
testified that on 29/6/2014 at 2.00 p.m. he held
autopsy on the head of the deceased Abdullah Al Noor
aged about 4 years, brought and identified by
Chatmohar Police Station Constable No. 865 Md.
Ainul Haque. On physical examination on the Head of
the dead body, it was found that the head was
completely putrefied skull, bone and teeth. Putrefied
skull only skull bones and teeth are present. The
skulls are separated from mandible. He opined that
the cause of death could not be determined due to

advance putrefaction. He identified the post mortem
report, which marked as Exhibit No.9 and his
signature on it marked as Exhibit No.9/1.
accused Sohel, this witness admitted that the skull
bones and teeth were present in the head and the
flash of the eyes; nose and skin of the face were
putrefied. He admitted that the face could not be
identified due to advance putrefaction.
P.W.15 Md. Saidul Islam deposed that on
27/6/2014, at 5:00 p.m., he saw human organs
wrapped in two polythene bags on the south side of
the Bhadra Government Primary School grounds. He
informed the matter to Mathurapur U. P. Chairman,
Sardar Azizul Haque and the local police over
telephone. The police opened the polythene bags and
in one polythene bag, there were two hands and from
neck to stomach of a human body and other
polythene bag contained the body part from waist to
feet of a human body but the body had no head and
the body was wearing half pant with cartoon image on

it and a steel amulet tied with a black thread was
found around his waist.  The police seized several
foul-smelling white polythene bags and the amulet
with the black thread in his presence. He identified
his signature in the seizure list which marked as
Exhibit No. 4/3. The police prepared the Inquest
Report of the headless dead body in his presence. He
identified his signature in the Inquest Report which
marked as Exhibit No. 2/4.
Accused Aziza Akhtar Rupa declined to crossexamine him.
During cross-examination by the accused Abdus
Samad, Kabir Hossain, and Ayesha Bewa, this witness
admitted that at that time, he was in Bhadra village
and at about 04:00 p.m. on getting information from
Choukider Khaleque, he along with 10/15 persons
went to the School ground and saw human organs
wrapped in two polythene bags at the outside of the
School ground. He informed the local Chairman and
the Police. He also denied that suggestion that he did

not inform the police. His house is situated about ½
K.M. away from the school ground.
accused Sohel, this witness admitted that Chota
Shalikha village is situated 2½ K.M. away from
Bhadra. He deposed that the color of the bloodstained shorts may be green. He denied the
suggestion that the police did not seize the steelcolored amulet tied with black thread in his presence.
P.W.16 Md. Akhtar Hossain deposed that on
27.06.2014, at about 5:00 PM, the police recovered
the headless body, legs and hands of a young boy
from the southern side of the ground of Bhadra
Primary School and prepared the Inquest Report of
the headless dead body in his presence. He identified
his signature in the Inquest Report, which marked as
Exhibit No. 2/5.
accused Sohel, this witness deposed that there were
two polythene bags containing the body parts and
these were lying on the southern side of the field. He

doesn’t know who saw these bags first and 400/500
peoples (men, women and police) were present there.
Accused Aziza Akhtar Rupa, Abdus Samad,
Kabir Hossain and Ayesha Bewa declined to crossexamine him.
P.W.17 Qurban Ali deposed that on 27.06.14, he
transported the headless body wrapped in polythene
bag to the Pabna Sadar Hospital morgue. On that
date, the police seized the yellow shorts with cartoon
image on it, which worn by the dead body and
prepared the seizure list. He identified the seizure list,
which marked as Exhibit No.10 and his signature on
it marked as Exhibit No. 10/1.
During cross-examination this witness deposed
that the body parts were in polythene bag and the
pant was not cut.
P.W.18 Inspector S.M. Moinuddin is the
Investigating
Officer,
who
deposed
25.06.2014, he was attached with the Chatmohar
police station as Sub-Inspector and the then Officerin-Charge filed the Chatmohar police station case No.

23 on 25.06.14. He was appointed as Investigating
Officer of the case. He also deposed that during the
investigation, he visited the place of occurrence,
prepared the sketch map with an index, the sketch
map marked as Exhibit No. - 11 and his signatures on
it marked as Exhibit No. 11/1 and the Index marked
as Exhibit No. 12 and his signatures on it marked as
Exhibit No.12/1. He recorded the statement of the
witnesses under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. He seized alamots and arrested the F.I.R.
named
accused
persons.
He
deposed
27.06.14, he recovered the headless body of the
victim, Abdullah-Al-Noor with both hands were
separated from the body and prepared the Inquest
report and he then sent the body to the morgue for
autopsy. He identified his signature in the Inquest
Report, which marked as Exhibit No. 2/6. He also
deposed that on 28.06.14, he recovered the severed
head of Abdullah-Al-Noor and prepared the Inquest
Report. He identified his signature in the Inquest
Report, which marked as Exhibit No. 5/4.  He sent

the accused Md. Sohel Biswash to the learned
Magistrate, who recorded his confessional statement
under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
This witness deposed that he collected and reviewed
the call list of all the mobile numbers that threatened
the Informant. He verified the names, addresses and
PC & PR of the accused persons. He collected 2 (two)
post mortem reports from the concerned hospitals. He
deposed that on 27.06.14 at 18.30 hours, he seized
some white polythene bags which contained very foul
smell, a steel colored amulet tied with a black thread.
He identified his signature in the seizure list, which
marked as Exhibit No. 4/4. He also deposed that on
27.06.14 at 20.20 hours, he seized the yellow shorts
with cartoon image on it, which contained very
unpleasant smell. He identified his signature in the
seizure list, which marked as Exhibit No.10/2. This
witness deposed that on 28.06.14 at 18.05 hours, he
seized some white polythene bags which contained
unpleasant/foul smell. He identified his signature in
the seizure list, which marked as Exhibit No. 3/3. He

also deposed that on 28.06.14 at 18.25 hours, he
seized a sharp knife, approximately eight inches long
including the handle, a yellow color old used school
bag with broken zipper and a few cut and torn white
polythene
bags,
these
were
contained
very
unpleasant/foul smell. He identified his signature in
the seizure list, which marked as Exhibit No. 6/3. He
identified the signatures of the then Officer-in-Charge
of Chatmohar Police Station on the FIR form because
he worked at the same place with him; these are
marked as Exhibit Nos. I/2, 1/Ka, 1Ka/1 and
1/Ka/2. After conclusion of the investigation, finding
prima facie case against the accused persons namely
Md. Abdus Samad, Md. Kabir, Most. Ayesha Bewa,
Md. Sohel Biswash and Aziza Akhtar Rupa, he
submitted the Charge Sheet being No. 165 dated
12.09.2014 under Sections 7, 8 and 30 of the
Prevention of Violence against Women and Children
Act, 2000 and Sections 302, 201 and 34 of the Penal
Code and gave final report against other accused
persons namely Alep Ali, Yasin and Zakirul as he did

not find any prima facie case against them. He
identified the accused persons namely Md. Abdus
Samad, Md. Kabir, Most. Ayesha Bewa, Md. Sohel
Biswash and Aziza Akhtar Rupa on the dock.
Bewa, this witness deposed that the occurrence took
place on 25.06.14 at 11.45 a.m. and the F.I.R. was
lodged on the same date at 21.15 hours. The place of
occurrence is situated at 3 K.M. away from the police
station. He deposed that there are 3 (three) mobile
SIM numbers in the ejahar and these are (1st number)
01863759734, (2nd number) 01755456569 and (3rd
number) 01745680754. He deposed that during
investigation, the ownership of these 3 (three) SIMs
could not be identified by the company. He then
deposed that on 26/6/14, at 9.30 a.m. he wrote to the
company seeking information about the five numbers
including the aforesaid three cell phone numbers and
he received a reply from the company, wherefrom it
transpires that these registration forms were blank,

incomplete and also contained wrong address. This
witness admitted that he found one correct SIM
number being 01721748364, wherefrom the ransom
was demanded and he arrested one Yasin Ali the
owner of the SIM but he neither send him up in the
charge sheet nor make him a witness in this case. He
admitted that he personally did not go to the company
to investigate the ownership of these SIMs. He
admitted that he did not send the alamots (material
exhibits) which contained bad smell for chemical
examination. He also admitted that he did not send
the dead body (without a head) for DNA testing to
identify the same because the father of the deceased
child identified the body. He admitted that a G.D.
Entry
was
made
relating
this
incident
at
Chatmohar Police Station but he did not summon that
G.D. Entry.
During cross-examination this witness admitted
that witness Atiyara Parveen did not tell him that
Ayesha Bewa used to live in their house, she used to
look after the land and money sent from abroad, or

when they came back from abroad and wanted the
land and money back, there was a dispute raised over
it, or the accused Samad returned from abroad after
7/8 months and he took Ayesha Bewa away with him
and while Ayesha was leaving she threatened her that
she would see how she lived with her husband and
children or the accused persons had conspired to
kidnap her child, or her son the victim was wearing
yellow shorts, which contained cartoon picture on it
and a steel-colored amulet. He admitted that the
witness Sukuma Gomez did not tell him that he heard
from the Informant that Samad, Kabir, Sohel and
Rupa were involved or witness Rezaul Karim alias
Babu did not tell him that on 27.06.14 the Informant
told him, the accused Samad, Sohel and Kabir were
involved or witness Jahangir Alam did not tell him
that after the burial, the Informant told the people
present there,  the accused Sohel, Samad and Rupa
were involved in this incident of murder or witness
Amir Hossain Minu did not tell him that a school bag,
a sharp knife and polythene bags were recovered

inside the Sohel's house or witness Lutfar Sarkar did
not tell him that the Informant disclosed the names of
the accused persons or he went to the Chatmohar
Police Station Bus Stand on 28.06.14 and on his way
back from there he saw the severed head of the dead
child at Haran Intersection. Witness Imran Hossain
did not tell him that he heard from his sister that
Noor was missing or his brother-in-law get a call from
an unknown number and he tried to contact with that
number or Noor had a amulet around his waist and
wearing pant with cartoon pictures on it or Aziza
Akhter Rupa, Sohel's mother and Advocate Abdul Aziz
of Pabna were present at Sohel's home or a knife, a
school bag or foul-smelling polythene were found in
the bathroom of Sohel's house. He denied the
suggestion that his investigation was perfunctory and
filed the charge sheet as per instruction of the
Informant without conducting a proper investigation.
He admitted that the PC and PR of these accused were
nil.

accused Sohel Biswash, this witness admitted that
Sohel Biswash is not a F.I.R. named accused or he is
not suspected as an accused. He admitted that the
Informant does not mention in the ejahar that his
house is a two-storied building and accused Sohel
Biswash lived on the ground floor and he has a Rod
Cement shop on the north side of the ground floor or
during the search, he knocked on the door of Sohel's
house or when Sohel opened the door, he asked him if
he had seen Noor and Sohel said that Noor went to his
house and asked for bananas but Sohel could not give
it to him as there were no bananas, then Noor left. He
admitted that he did not mention in the draft map or
index that Sohel Biswash lives in the ground floor of
the building from where Noor was abducted and he
did not mark the location of any latrine in the draft
map. He admitted that he did not investigate the G.D.
Entry, which lodged before this case but one S.I.
investigated it. He admitted that the amulet and pant
with cartoon image on it are found in different places

and he did not conduct any Test Identification (TID)
Parade through the learned Magistrate for the pant
and amulet. He admitted that he did not conduct any
chemical test to determine, whether the foul odor in
the seized polythene were from human body. He also
admitted that he arrested Sohel on 27.06.14 at 19.15
hours beside of the Informant’s house. He admitted
that he did not mention in the seizure list that a knife,
a school bag and foul odor polythene were recovered
from the latrine. He deposed that he collected the call
list of the SIM numbers mentioned in the ejahar but
these SIMs could not be identified as the user names
were illegible. He did not send up accused Yasin and
F.I.R. named accused namely Haji Alef Ali Molla and
Zakirul in the charge sheet. He sends Sohel to the
court on 28.06.14 and applied for his remand on that
date and 03 (three) days remand was granted on
30.06.14. He took him into his custody on 30.06.14
and on 01.07.14, he confessed to the crime and in his
confessional statement; he mentioned the name of one
Liton as his accomplice. He admitted that he did not

assign any reason as to why Liton was not sent up in
the charge sheet. He denied the suggestion that Sohel
was physically tortured and he was admitted to the
Prison Hospital due to his injury and he made a
confessional statement due to fear of torture. He
denied the suggestion that Sohel made confessional
statement, according to what Police taught him. He
denied the suggestion that he correctly verified the
ownership of the phone numbers of Alep Ali, Yasin
and Zakirul but they were not sent up in the charge
sheet in exchange of bribe money and instead of Alep
Ali, Yasin and Zakirul, he sent up in the charge sheet
Sohel on false allegation. He denied the suggestion
that he deposed falsely in this case. He denied the
suggestion that the accused Sohel and Aziza Akhter
were not involved in the incident of murder of the
victim Noor.
P.W.19
Sub-Inspector
Asif
Mohammad
Siddiqul Islam is the Investigating Officer, who
deposed that as per the order of the learned Judge, he
was
appointed
Investigating
Officer

investigate
case
after
conclusion
Investigation; he filed the supplementary charge sheet
in this case. He deposed that he had conducted an
extensive investigation with regard to the accused
Liton. But he failed to find any information, evidence
or proof relating to the existence of accused Liton. The
accused Sohel mentioned the imaginary and fictional
character of one Liton mentioned in his confessional
statement before the court to save himself. He created
this imaginary character and no evidence was found
relating to the existence of accused Liton and as such,
he requested to discharge him from the instant case.
He deposed that he also found the investigation
conducted by the previous I.O. was correct, as such,
he submitted the supplementary charge sheet being
No. 59 dated 29.03.16 under Sections 7, 8 and 30 of
the Prevention of Violence against Women and
Children Act read with Sections 302, 201 and 34 of
the Penal Code.

Bewa, this witness admitted that he did not
investigate with regard to the ownership of the mobile
phones/ SIM cards mentioned in the Ejahar, which
demanded ransom. He denied the suggestion that his
investigation was perfunctory and he deposed falsely
in this case.
that during the investigation, he find that accused
Aziza Akhtar Rupa was not involved in this incident,
but he include her name in the charge sheet as the
previous Investigating Officer had included her as
accused in the charge sheet.
accused Sohel, this witness admitted that Sohel
Biswash is not a F.I.R named accused and he was not
mentioned as a suspect. He deposed that he received
an order to investigate about Liton. He admitted that
during the investigation, he did not record any
statement of the witness. He admitted that he
mentioned in the charge sheet relating to the

statement given by Sohel Biswash about accused
Liton was not true. He denied the suggestion that
Sohel was physically tortured to make confessional
statement. He denied the suggestion that he deposed
These are the depositions of the prosecution
witnesses.
We have gone through the First Information
Report, Inquest Report, Charge Sheet, deposition of
the Witnesses, Confessional Statement of the convict
Sohel Biswash, impugned Judgment and Order and
other materials on record. We have given our anxious
consideration to the submissions as advanced by the
learned Advocates for both the sides. We find that the
condemner Sohel Biswash and appellant Abdus
Samad were convicted and sentenced on the basis of
the evidence adduced by the Prosecution witnesses as
well as the Confessional Statement of the convict
Sohel Biswash and circumstantial evidence. In the
instant case, there was no ocular evidence witnessing
the commission of offence committed by convict-

appellants at the house of the Informant. Prosecution
relied upon circumstantial evidence to proof of its
case. Commission of crime can also be proved by
circumstantial evidence. Circumstantial evidence is
more cogent and convincing than the ocular evidence.
It is correctly said that witnesses may tell a lie and it
is not difficult to procure false, tutored and biased
witnesses but it is very much difficult to procure
circumstantial evidence. In the instant case, we find
that all the private prosecution witnesses are near
relatives of the Informant and they did not see the
incident took place in the home of the victim
Abdullah-Al-Noor. Prosecution witnesses corroborated
with each other relating to the evidence that the
missing of the victim, demanding of ransom, recovery
of the alamots, body and head of the victim and the
Confessional Statement of the convict Sohel Biswash.
Learned Advocates appearing for the condemned
prisoner and the convict-appellant Md. Abdus Samad
argued that all the prosecution witnesses are near
relatives of the informant and the victim, which cast

serious
doubt
truthfulness
prosecution case. The prosecution witnesses have
failed to identify the recovered head and body as the
body of the victim Abdullah Al Noor, also failed to
prove the motive as well as failed to prove the
confessional statement of the condemned-prisoner
Sohel Biswash was made voluntarily and true, rather
it was obtained by torturing the condemned-prisoner.
There was illegality in the initiation of the instant case
and the defense case is more probably than the
prosecution case; they failed to prove their case
beyond reasonable doubt by adducing reliable oral
and documentary evidence as such, the conviction
and sentence passed by trial Court is illegal.
First question raised by the learned Advocate for
the Appellants that whether or not all the prosecution
witnesses are near relatives of the Informant or victim
and judgment and order of conviction and sentence
passed by the trial Court against this appellant on the
basis of the evidence of interested, inter-related and
partisan witnesses is sustainable in law. The evidence

of interested, inter-related and partisan witnesses
must be closely scrutinized before it is accepted. We
find support of this contention in the case of Nawabul
Alam and ors. Vs. The State, 15 BLD (AD) 61 wherein it
is held:
“The principle that is to be followed is that
the evidence of persons falling in the
category of interested, interrelated and
partisan witnesses, must be closely and
critically scrutinized. They should not be
accepted
their
face
value.
Their
cannot
be
rejected
outright
simply
because
they
are
witnesses for that will result in a failure of
justice, but their evidence is liable to be
scrutinized with more care and caution
than
is
necessary
case
disinterested and unrelated witnesses. An
interested witness is one who has a
motive for falsely implication an accused
person and that is the reason why his
evidence is initially suspect. His evidence
has
cross
hurdle
critical
appreciation. As his evidence cannot be
thrown out mechanically because of his
interestedness, so his evidence cannot be
accepted mechanically without a critical

examination. As Hamoodur Rahman, J.
(as his Lordship then was) observed in the
case of Ali Ahmed vs. State (14 DLR (SC)
81):
“Prudence, of Course, requires that the
evidence of an interested witness should
be scrutinized with care and conviction
should not be based upon such evidence
alone unless the Court can place implicit
reliance thereon” (Para -10).
……………….The rule that, the evidence of
witnesses
requires
corroboration is not an inflexible one it is a
rule of caution rather than an ordinary
rule of appreciation of evidence. The
Supreme Court of Pakistan spelt out the
rule in the case of Nazir Vs. The State, 14
DLR (SC) 159, as follows:
“……….we had no intention of laying
down an inflexible rule that the statement
witness
(by
which
expression is meant a witness who has a
motive for falsely implicating an accused
person) can never be accepted without
corroboration. There may be an interested
witness whom the Court regards as
incapable
falsely,
implicating
innocent person. But he will be an

exceptional witness and, so far as an
ordinary interested witness is concerned,
it cannot be said that it is safe to rely upon
his testimony in respect of every person
against whom he deposes. In order,
therefore, to be satisfied that no innocent
persons are being implicated along with
the guilty the Court will in the case of an
ordinary interested witness look for same
circumstances that gives sufficient support
to his statement so as to create that
degree of probability which can be made
the basis of conviction. That is what is
meant by saying that the statement of an
witness
ordinarily
needs
corroboration.
……The High court Division was obviously
wrong
holding
no
corroboration was necessary in this case.
It failed to scrutinize the evidence of
interested eye- witnesses and totally
ignored the fact that the evidence of P.Ws.
3-5 having so many infirmities is by itself
insufficient and unsafe to sustain any
conviction on a capital charge and requires
corroboration by either circumstantial or
ocular corroborative evidence.”

In the instant case, we find that prosecution
witnesses are material witnesses. Admittedly, P.W. 1
is the Informant and father of the victim, P.W. 2 is the
mother of the victim and P.W.3 Md. Monirul Islam is
the brother-in-law (i¡ul¡ i¡C) of the Informant,  P.W.7
Md. Amir Hossain Minu is the uncle-in-law of the
Informant, P.W.9 Md. Amir Hossain is the father-inlaw of the Informant and P.W.10 Md. Imran Hossain
is the brother-in-law (nÉ¡mL) of the Informant, they are
closely related to each other, though they are close
relatives of the victim, but they cannot be considered
as interested witness. There is no reason that the
testimony of P.W. Nos. 1, 2, 3,7,9 and 10 can be
discarded or liable to be flung to the wind simply
because they happened to be close relative of the
victim.
They
are
most
natural,
probable
competent witnesses in the present case.  We find
support of this contention in the case of State vs.
Moslem reported in 55 DLR (2003) 116 wherein this
Division held that:

“A close relative who is a material
witness cannot be regarded as
witness.
The
terms
‘interestedness’
postulates
witness must have some direct interest in
having the accused somehow  or the other
connected for some animus or some other
reasons.
‘Interestedness’
has
been
defined by Supreme Court of Pakistan in
the case of Nazir and others vs. State,
PLD 1962 (SC)269  in the following
words. “Interested witness is one who
has a motive for falsely implicating an
accused person.”
There is no law that the statement of a
particular witness is liable be flung to the
wind simply because he happens to be a
close relative of the victim. However, the
court
while putting reliance on
statement of a close relation and so-called
interested witness would be on its tiptoe
and guard and would scrutinize the
statement more carefully. Evidence of
close relative has only to be scrutinized
with greater care in order to find out
whether the same suffer from internal
marks
falsehood
due
interestedness.”

Second question raised by learned Senior
Counsel
Mr.
Chowdhury
whether
or
not
prosecution failed to identify the recovered head and
body of the unknown deceased as the body of the
victim Abdullah Al Noor. Learned Counsel argued that
the alleged occurrence took place on 25.06.2014 and
the beheaded dead body of the victim was recovered
on 27.06.2014 and the alleged head was recovered on
28.06.2014 and these were found decomposed and
identification was absolutely doubtful but the trial
court shifted the onus upon the defense to disprove
though beheaded dead body and head of the victim
were neither identifiable nor was identified by the
father to be the head and body of his son, the victim
Abdullah Al Noor.
In the instant case, we find that P.W.1 Md. Abul
Hossain deposed that saw the body of a child lying in
the southern part of the school field. The body’s head
had been severed and missing, the hands had been
cut off from the body, the thighs had been cut, and
the abdomen had been slashed open and around the

waist there was a steel amulet tied with a black
thread, and the body was wearing a yellow half-pant
with a cartoon image on it and he identified the body
as that of his son, Abdullah Al Noor from the amulet
and the half-pant. Other prosecution witnesses also
corroborated that P.W.1 Md. Abul Hossain identified
the dead body of his son, Abdullah Al Noor. We have
perused
condemned-prisoner made under section 164 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure wherein he categorically
stated that:-
--------c‡i Avwg Abygvb 6:15 Uvi w`‡K Zvjv Ly‡j evmvi †fZ‡i hvB|
wjUb b~i‡K wb‡q ev_i“‡gi †fZ‡i wQUKvix w`‡q wQj| Avwg `iRvq bK
K‡i ewj Avwg †mv‡nj| ZLb wjUb `iRv Lyj‡j Avwg fqvbK `„k¨Uv †`wL|
Avwg wjUb‡K ewj Avcwb gvbyl bv Rv‡bvqvi|
ZLb †m Avgv‡K Qzwi a‡i e‡j `iRv Ly‡j †`| bvB‡j
†Zv‡K, †Zvi ¯¿x I mš—vb‡K †g‡i †dje|
The aforesaid confessional statement of the
condemned-prisoner made under section 164 of the
Code
Procedure
corroborated
with
evidence of other prosecution witnesses especially

P.W.1 Md. Abul Hossain, P.W.3 Md. Monirul Islam,
P.W.4 Sukumar Gomez, P.W.5 Md. Rezaul Karim,
P.W.6 Md. Jahangir Alam and P.W.15 Md. Saidul
Islam. They together went to the southern side of the
said Primary School playground wherein they saw
human organs wrapped in two polythene bags on the
south side of the Bhadra Government Primary School
ground. In one polythene bag, there were two hands
and from neck to stomach of a human body and other
polythene bag contained from waist to foot of a human
body but the body had no head and the body was
wearing half pant with cartoon image on it and a steel
amulet with a black thread around his waist. Their
statements
also
corroborated
with
medical
evidence of P.W.12 Dr. Md. Rezaul Karim and P.W.14
Dr. Md. Kamal Osman.
Thus, we are of the view that the P.W.1 Md. Abul
Hossain
successfully
proved
and identified
recovered head and body of the victim as the body and
head of his son, the victim Abdullah Al Noor as the
body was wearing half pant with cartoon image on it

and a steel amulet with a black thread around his
waist.
Third question raised by the learned Senior
Counsel Mr. Chowdhury that the learned Judge of the
trial court committed an error of law in convicting the
appellant both under sections 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu
Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 (as amended in 2003) and
also under Section 302 of the Penal Code, when the
two offences are distinct and under two different laws.
In the instant case, we find that the learned
Judge of the trial court having perused the record
rightly found that an offence under section 302 of the
Penal Code and offence under section 7 of the Nari-OShishu Nirjatan Ain are connected in such a manner
that both the offence have arisen out of the self-same
occurrence and in the interest of justice as per
provision of section 27(3) of the Nari-O-Shishu Daman
Ain, both the offence should be tried together by the
Tribunal in accordance with the provision of aforesaid
law. We do not find any illegality in trying both the
offence before the Druto Bichar Tribunal.

Fourth question raised by the learned Senior
Counsel
Mr.
Chowdhury
statement of condemned-prisoner Sohel Biswash is
absolutely an exculpatory one, except that of act of
screening evidence and the confessional statement not
made voluntarily and it was not true, rather it was
obtained by torturing the condemned-prisoner and he
made this statement under duress and the learned
Magistrate also failed to comply with the provisions of
Sections 364 and 164 of the Code of Criminal
while
recorded
statement of the condemned-prisoner Sohel Biswash.
On the contrary, the learned Deputy Attorney
General argued that the confessional statement made
by the convict was inculpatory in nature and it was
made voluntarily and the learned Additional Chief
Judicial Magistrate after complying the provisions of
Sections 364 and 164 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure recorded the said confessional statement of
the condemned-prisoner, there was no evidence, it

was obtained by torturing the condemned-prisoner
and he made this statement under duress.
Now let us consider whether the confessional
statement of the condemned-prisoner is true and
voluntary.
We have perused the confessional statement of
the condemned-prisoner wherefrom it transpires that
he implicated himself with regard to the allowing and
accommodating one co-accused namely Liton, (not
sent up in the charge sheet) in kidnapping and
murdering the victim in his home and he hide the
head and body of the victim but exculpated himself so
far as the commission of the murder. However, the
condemned-prisoner
Md.
Sohel
Biswas
his
application for retraction of confessional statement
written
submitted
during
examination under Section 342 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, he sought to exculpate himself
both from the offence of allowing and accommodating
one Liton in kidnapping and murdering the victim in
his home as well as for the offence of concealing or

hiding of the head and body of the victim rather it was
obtained by torturing the condemned-prisoner and he
made this statement under duress.
Let us now consider the confessional statement
of the condemned-prisoner made under section 164 of
Code
wherein
categorically stated that:-
 Avwg 24.06.2014 Bs Zvwi‡L mÜ¨vi mgq Qvgv` fvB‡K ewj
Avcwb †jvKUv‡K AvMvgxKvj mKvj 10:30 Uvi w`‡K Avgvi Kv‡Q cvVvB‡eb|
K_vgZ 25.06.2014 Bs Zvwi‡L †jvKUv mKvj 10:45 Uvi w`‡K Avgvi fvov evmvq
Av‡m| Zvi eqm Abygvb 28/29 eQi n‡e| †m Avgv‡K e‡j †m Qvgv` fvB‡qi
†jvK| Avwg wRÁvmv Ki‡j Zvi bvg wjUb e‡j| Zv‡K Avgvi iy‡g XzKvB| Avgvi ¯¿x
ZLb ¯‹z‡j wQj| Aveyj †nv‡mb †`vZjvq _v‡K| Avwg bxP Zjvq _vwK| wjUb‡K N‡i
†i‡L Avwg Qv‡` hvB| Avgvi Mv nvZ cv Kvc wQj| wKQz¶Y ci Qv` †_‡K iy‡g XzKvi
Rb¨ bx‡P Avwm| `iRvq bK Ki‡Z _vwK| `iRv Lyj‡j †`wL wjUb b~i †K gyL †P‡c
a‡i Av‡Q| ZLb Avwg wjUb‡K ewj b~‡ii †hb †Kvb ¶wZ bv nq| Avwg N‡ii `iRv
evwni †_‡K Zvjv †`B| †fZ‡i b~i I wjUb _v‡K| wjU‡bi GwUPyW Avgvi fvj
jvMwQj bv| Gi g‡a¨ b~‡ii gv Ici †_‡K K‡qKevi G‡mwQj b~‡ii †Luv‡R| Avwg
Zv‡K ewj b~i GBw`‡K Av‡m bvB| Avwg wb‡R‡K ¯^vfvweK ivLvi †Póv KiwQjvg|
Aci w`‡K b~i‡K LyuR‡Z _vwK| LyR‡Z LyR‡Z Avwg GKUv f¨v‡b K‡i bZzb evRv‡i
mvgv` fvB‡qi Kv‡Q hvw”Qjvg| ZLb Abygvb †ejv 11:30 Uv n‡e| c‡_ g‡a¨ ïwb

cywjk Qvgv` fvB‡K a‡i wb‡q †M‡Q| ZLb Avgvi AviI fq †j‡M †Mj| Avwg gvBK
wb‡q Avwm| wgwWqv‡K RvbvB| b~‡ii †LvRvi wel‡q wb‡R Zrci nB| Avgvi ¯¿x‡K
†dv‡b by‡ii wb‡LuvR nIqvi welqwU RvbvB| Avwg Aveyj fvB‡K wb‡q evB‡i wQjvg|
Avgvi ¯¿x †Q‡j‡K wb‡q ¯‹zj †_‡K evwo‡Z Av‡m| wKQz¶Y ci †m †`vZjvq hvq|
Avwg ZLb wfZ‡i hvB| wjUb b~i‡K wb‡q †fZ‡i GKUv N‡ii g‡a¨ wQj| WvBwbs mn
03 iy‡gi evmv Avgvi| †h i„ygUvq wjUb b~i‡K wb‡q wQj †mLv‡b mvaviYZ Avgiv
†KD hvBbv| Avwg evB‡i P‡j Avwm| weKvj 4:00 Uvi w`‡K Avwg evmvq †h‡q
ev_i“‡gi wQUKvix Lyj‡Z †`wL wjUb b~i‡K wb‡q e‡m Av‡Q| b~i gviv †M‡Q| Avwg
Zv‡K wRÁvmv Kwi Avcwb GUv wK Ki‡jb| ZLb wjUb e‡j Avwg GZ¶Y e‡m AvwQ|
b~i KvbœvKvwU KiwQj| Avwg KZ¶Y Zvi gyL †P‡c a‡i ivLe| gyL †P‡c a‡i ivL‡Z
†m gviv †M‡Q `g eÜ n‡q| Zv‡K ewj  Avcwb b~i‡K wb‡q hvb| wjUb Avgvi mv‡_
ZK©vZwK© K‡i| Avwg wjUb‡K mÜ¨v 6:00 Uvi g‡a¨ b~‡ii e¨e¯’v Kivi K_v e‡j
evmvq Zvjv w`‡q †ei n‡q Avwm| Avgvi ¯¿x Ic‡i wQj| ¯¿x Ici †_‡K Avm‡Q wKbv
d‡jv KiwQjvg| c‡i Avwg Abygvb 6:15 Uvi w`‡K Zvjv Ly‡j evmvi †fZ‡i hvB|
wjUb b~i‡K wb‡q ev_i“‡gi †fZ‡i wQUKvix w`‡q wQj| Avwg `iRvq bK K‡i ewj
Avwg †mv‡nj| ZLb wjUb `iRv Lyj‡j Avwg fqvbK `„k¨Uv †`wL| Avwg wjUb‡K ewj
Avcwb gvbyl bv Rv‡bvqvi| b~‡ii gv_v, nvZ wew”Qbœ wQj| fzwoI KvUv wQj| ZLb †m
Avgv‡K Qzwi a‡i e‡j `iRv Ly‡j †`| bvB‡j †Zv‡K, †Zvi ¯¿x I mš—vb‡K †g‡i
†dje| †Zvi †c‡U Qzwi gvie| Zvi nv‡Zi QzwiUv †m Avgvi ivbœv Ni †_‡K wb‡q
G‡mwQj| H Qzwi w`‡q Avg KvUZvg| Pwcs †ev‡W© mewR KvUZvg| †m †gBb `iRvi
wQUKvwb wb‡R Ly‡j| nv‡Zi QzwiUv †m `iRvi cv‡ki w÷‡ji ev‡·i Dci iv‡L|

`iRv Ly‡j wjUb ¯^vfvweKfv‡e P‡j hvq| Avwg Zvi jvkUv ev_i“‡gi GK †Kvbvq
†i‡L †`B| iv‡Î Avgiv H iy‡g NygvB bvB| mKv‡j Nyg †_‡K DV‡j iy‡g MÜ †ei
nq| ¯¿x wRÁvmv Ki‡j ewj m¤¢eZ wcqv‡Ri MÜ| Avgvi Avav g‡bi gZ wcqvR †Kbv
wQj| mKv‡j ¯¿x evey‡K wb‡q ¯‹z‡j †M‡j Avwg evRv‡i Avwm| eo cwj e¨vM wKwb|
evwo‡Z G‡m b~i‡K cwje¨v‡Mi g‡a¨ fwi| Kv‡a Szjv‡bv GKUv e¨vM wQj Avgvi| H
e¨v‡Mi g‡a¨ b~i‡K ivwL| ev_i“g cwi¯‹vi Kwi| e¨vMUv IqviWª‡ci g‡a¨ ivwL|
evmvq †¯ú Kwi| ivwÎ Abygvb 8:00 Uvi mgq Avwg evRv‡i hvB| wR‡iv c‡q‡›U G‡m
gwbi‡K ewj Zvi gUi mvB‡Kj Uv GKUz w`‡Z| gwb‡ii evwo †`vjb G| †m Avgvi
cwiwPZ| Avgv‡K eo fvB e‡j| gwb‡ii gUi mvB‡Kj wb‡q evmvq G‡m ¯¿x‡K ewj
Zzwg Ic‡ii fvexi mv‡_ K_v ej| ¯¿x Ic‡i †M‡j e¨vM fwZ© b~‡ii jvkUv wb‡q gUi
mvB‡K‡j K‡i fv`iv miKvix ¯‹zj gv‡Vi cv‡k †Sv‡c wb‡q wM‡q cwjw_b mn jvkUv
†d‡j w`B| Zvici gUi mvB‡K‡j K‡i e¨vM mn evmvq Avwm| gUi mvB‡Kj gwbi‡K
w`‡q f¨v‡b K‡i evmvq Avwm|”
The trial court also found convict-appellant Md.
Sohel Biswash voluntarily made the true statement
and the confessional statement is inculpatory in
nature. We have also perused the confessional
wherefrom
it
transpires
condemned-prisoner narrated vivid picture as to how
and what manner the alleged occurrence took place,

which corroborated with the other independent
evidence adduced by the prosecution witnesses.
Now, the question is whether a confession, partly
exculpatory and partly inculpatory, is at all a
confession. Notwithstanding the general principle that
a confession should be accepted or rejected as a
whole, but in certain facts and circumstances, the
inculpatory part may be accepted if the exculpatory
part is found to be false or basically improbable
regard being had to reason and human conduct. We
find support of this contention in the case of The State
-Vs-Lalu Miah and another. Reported in 7 BLD (Ad)
page-212.
P.W.18
Sub-Inspector,
S.M.
Moinuddin deposed that the accused Sohel in his
confessional statement; he mentioned the name of one
Liton as his accomplice, but he did not assign any
reason as to why Liton was not sent up in the charge
sheet. P.W.19 Sub-Inspector Asif Mohammad Siddiqul
Islam is the 2nd Investigating Officer. He deposed that
he conducted extensive investigation with regard to
accused Liton. But he failed to find any information or

proof about the existence of Liton. The accused Sohel
mentioned an imaginary and fictional character of
Liton in his confessional statement before the court
only to save him. He created this imaginary character
and there is no evidence was found about Liton or his
existence and as such, he requested to discharge him.
Thus, we are of the view that the exculpatory part of
the confession is found to be false one.
Now the question is whether or not the
prosecution could prove that the condemner Sohel
Biswas in furtherance of his intention kidnapped the
victim Abdullah Al Noor and caused his death and /or
for demand of ransom. We find that the condemner
Sohel Biswash was convicted and sentenced on the
basis of the evidence adduced by the Prosecution
witnesses as well as the Confessional Statement of the
convict Sohel Biswash and circumstantial evidence.
There is no ocular evidence. None of the prosecution
witnesses saw the kidnapping and death of the
deceased. The trial Court convicted the condemner
Sohel Biswas mainly on the basis of his confessional

statement and the testimony of prosecution witnesses
and circumstantial evidence. In the instant case, we
have categorically considered the depositions of all the
prosecution witnesses and other relevant documents
on record and we find that there is no direct evidence
against the condemner in kidnapping and causing
murder of the deceased.  The prosecution sought to
prove the charge on certain circumstantial facts that
on 25.06.2014 at 11.45 a.m. the victim was missing
from his house. P.W.2, Most. Atiara Parveen deposed
that she knocked on the door of the accused Sohel
Biswas and he told her that Noor had not come to his
residence, without opening the door of his home. Later
on, she again knocked the door on Sohel’s home, at
that time, accused Sohel opened the door and as she
asked whether Noor was there, then he said that Noor
had come and asked for a banana, but as there was
no banana in the house, he could not give him and
then victim Noor left. P.W.9 Md. Amir Hossain
deposed that during search he knocked on the door of
Sohel Biswas's home and he opened the door and

asked him whether he had seen Noor? In reply Sohel
said that he had not seen him. He again went to
Sohel's house, at that time, Sohel said Noor came to
his house and asked for bananas, but he could not
give it to him, then Noor left. Thereafter, on the same
day, at 3.45 p.m. unknown person called the victim’s
father P.W.1 Md. Abul Hossain on his mobile phone
demanded an amount of Taka 15,00,000 as ransom
and if the ransom was not paid, the child would be
killed. Later, on 27 June 2014, the police informed the
P.W.1 Md. Abul Hossain over telephone that a
headless child body, both hands were severed from
the body, the legs had been cut off below the thighs,
the abdomen had been cut open was found at the
southern
side
playground
Bhadra
Government Primary School and he rushed to the
playground and identified the body of the victim.
Thereafter, on 28.06.14, at about 05:00 p.m. while
they were returning from the burial of the victim,
having noticed unpleasant foul smell coming from the
north side of the culvert and on search Noor's head

was found wrapped in polythene bag. P.W.18 SubInspector, SM Moinuddin deposed that he seized the
yellow shorts with cartoon image on it, which
contained very foul smell and on 28.06.14 at 18.05
hours, he seized some white polythene bags which
contained very foul smell. He also deposed that on
28.06.14, the police arrested the accused Sohel and
searched his house and he seized a sharp knife,
approximately eight inches long including the handle,
a wet yellow colour old used school bag with a broken
zipper and a few cut and torn white polythene bags,
these alamots are contained very foul-smell, recovered
from the attached bathroom of the condemner Sohel
Biswash’s bedroom. P.W.13 Abu Saleh Md. Salah
Uddin Khan, Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Pabna who recorded the confessional statement of the
accused Md. Sohel Biswas on 01.07.2014 after
observing all statutory formalities. He narrated vivid
picture as to how and what manner the alleged
occurrence took place, which corroborated with the
other
independent
adduced
by

prosecution witnesses including the medical evidence,
the post mortem report. P.W.12 Dr. Md. Rezaul Karim,
who held autopsy on the body of the deceased
Abdullah Al Noor aged about 4 years. The dead body
was found in 3 (three) parts: He found the body is
putrefacted in three pieces:-
(1) Trunk with lower extremity without head.
(11) Right upper extremity.
(III) Left upper extremity. All parts belong to
same body extremity fit properly with Trunk and skin
color similar.
The Medical Board found the following external
injuries:-
(1) Multiple incised wound on neck separating
head from the Trunk.
(II) Multiple incised wound separating right
upper extremity from the trunk at its Junction
with extremity.
(3) Multiple incised wound separating left upper
extremity from the trunk at its Junction with
extremity.

(4) Incised wound, size whole breadth of
abdomen 4.1" x3" on mid abdomen.
(5) Incised wound, size 4"x1" x 2 ½" anterior
aspects of left thigh near its Junction with the
trunk.
(6) Incised wound 4"x1"x2" anterior aspect of
right thigh near its junction with the trunk.
He opined that cause of death could not be
determined because of advanced putrefaction.
P.W.14 Dr. Md. Kamal Osman, who held autopsy
on the head of the deceased Abdullah Al Noor aged
about 4 years. He found that the head was completely
putrefied skull, bone and teeth. Putrefied skull only
skull bones and teeth are present. The skulls are
separated from mandible. He opined that cause of
death could not be determined due to advance
putrefaction.
We find that the condemner Sohel Biswash was
convicted and sentenced on the basis of the evidence
adduced by the P.W.1 Md. Abul Hossain P.W.2, Most.
Atiara Parveen P.W.3 Md. Monirul Islam P.W.4

Sukumar Gomez P.W.5 Md. Rezaul Karim P.W.6 Md.
Jahangir Alam P.W.7 Md. Amir Hossain Minu P.W.8
Md. Lutfar Sarkar P.W.9 Md. Amir Hossain P.W.10
Md. Imran Hossain P.W.11 Md. Sonaullah P.W.12 Dr.
Md. Rezaul Karim P.W.13 Abu Saleh Md. Salah Uddin
Khan, P.W.14 Dr. Md. Kamal Osman P.W.15 Md.
Saidul Islam P.W.16 Md. Akhtar Hossain P.W.17
Qurban Ali P.W.18 Inspector, SM Moinuddin P.W.19
Sub-Inspector Asif Mohammad Siddiqul Islam as well
as the Confessional Statement of the convict Sohel
Biswas and circumstantial evidence. We also find that
the confessional statement made by the condemner
Sohel Biswash also corroborated with the inquest
report and two aforesaid post mortem report and the
testimony of Prosecution Witnesses as well as
circumstantial evidence.
As there is no break in the chain of causation
chain
or
circumstances
connecting
condemner Sohel Biswash with the kidnapping and
killing
victim
Abdullah-Al-Noor
circumstantial evidence is more cogent than the

evidence of eye witness and after perusing the
materials on record, we are of the view that the
prosecution has able to connect the condemner Sohel
Biswash with the kidnapping and killing of the victim
Abdullah-Al-Noor, which attract the  provision of the
Section 302 of the Penal Code and section 7 of the
Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000.
However, this is a Death Reference sent by the
trial court for confirmation of Death sentence. We
have perused all relevant documents of this case
including inquest report, charge sheet, seizure list,
deposition of the witnesses as well as the confessional
statement of the convict Sohel Biswash and the
judgment and order of conviction and sentence in
question. We do not find irregularity or any illegality
with regard to the conviction of the condemner Sohel
Biswash under Section 302 of the Penal Code and
section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain,
2000 and as such, we are inclined to uphold the
conviction of Sohel Biswash passed by the trial court
below.

 According to the provision of Section 302 of the
Penal Code, discretion has been conferred upon the
Court to award two types of sentences. Death or
imprisonment for life, the discretion is to be exercised
in accordance with the fundamental principle of
criminal justice. With regards to the sentence passed
against the condemned-prisoner Sohel Biswash, the
learned Advocate appearing on his behalf has prayed
for commutation of his sentence on the ground of long
delay in disposal of the Death Reference and other
attending circumstances. Let us now consider as to
whether there are extenuating circumstances for
commutation of the sentence of death of the
condemned-prisoner, we find that the condemned-
prisoner is aged about 38 years, when he was
examined under section 342 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. The record indicates that he is not a
habitual
offender
cannot
be
at
all
characterized to be a menace to the society. It also
appears to us that condemned-prisoner has been
languishing in jail since 27.06.2014 and he has been

detained in condemned cell since 28.06.2018, i.e.
from the date of pronouncement of the judgment and
order of conviction and sentence. He is suffering in jail
custody for more than 11 years, out of which he spent
about seven years in the condemned Cell. Taking an
account
aggravating
mitigating
circumstances, we are of the considered view that the
ends of justice will be met if the death sentence is
altered to one of imprisonment for life. The convictappellant Sohel Biswash thus, stands sentenced to
imprisonment for life.
Now the question is whether or not the
prosecution could prove that the convicted appellant
Md. Abdus Samad acted in furtherance of his
intention to kidnap the victim Abdullah-Al-Noor.
Learned Advocate Mr. Khan argued that the
F.I.R. named accused persons including the convict
appellant Md. Abdus Samad was suspected by the
Informant but no credible evidence or witness was
found against him and this suspicion was shifted on
01.07.2014 when the confessional statement of Sohel

Biswash was recorded. Accused Md. Sohel Biswash
made a confessional statement under Section 164 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure on 01.07.2014,
implicating Abdus Samad as one of the planner or
conspirator for kidnapping of the victim. However, the
confession
appellant
is
absolutely
exculpatory one, which cannot be used against other
co-accused. Further, there is no ingredient of offence
as contemplated under section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu
Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 but the trial Court with
erroneous view and wrong findings convicted and
sentenced the convict- appellant Md. Abdus Samad.
In the instant case, we find that the learned
Judge of the Druto Bichar Tribunal, Rajshahi
convicted the appellant Md. Abdus Samad under
Section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain,
2000. The appellant was convicted on charge of
kidnapping. According to the Section 2(b) the term
‘kidnapped’ (Acnib) is defined, which reads as follows:

2(b) "Acnib" A_© ejcÖ‡uvM ev cÖjy× Kwiqv ev dzmjvBqv ev fzj
eySvBqv ev fxwZ cÖ`k©b Kwiqv †Kvb ¯’vb nB‡Z †Kvb e¨w³‡K Ab¨Î
hvB‡Z eva¨ Kiv;
The provision of section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu
Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000, provides punishment for
‘kidnapping’ or (Acnib) which reads as follows:
Section 7: bvix I wkï Acni‡Yi kvwÙ¹ hw` †Kvb e¨w³ aviv 5G E­õ¢Ma †Kvb Aciva msNU‡bi D‡Ïk¨ e¨ZxZ Ab¨ †Kvb D‡Ï‡k¨
†Kvb bvix ev wkï‡K AcniY K‡ib, Zvnv nB‡j D³ e¨w³ hve¾xeb
Kviv`‡ä ev Ab~¨b †PŠÏ ermi mkÖg Kviv`‡ä `äbxq nB‡eb Ges
Bnvi AwZwi³ A_©`‡äI `äbxq nB‡eb|

Let us now consider whether or not the
prosecution has been able to prove the allegation of
kidnapping against the appellant Md. Abdus Samad.
In the instant case, we have categorically
considered the depositions of all the prosecution
witnesses and other relevant documents on record
and we find that there is no direct evidence against
the appellant Md. Abdus Samad in kidnapping the
victim Abdullah-Al-Noor. There is no ocular evidence.
None of the prosecution witnesses saw the incident of

kidnapping the deceased. The trial Court convicted
the appellant Md. Abdus Samad mainly on the basis
of confessional statement of the condemner Sohel
Biswash and the testimony of Prosecution Witnesses.
The Informant Md. Abul Hossain lodged the First
Information Report (FIR) to the Officer-in-Charge of
the Chatmohor Police Station on 25.06.2014 alleging
interalia that accused persons including this appellant
along with 5/6 unknown accused have threatened the
Informant on several occasions, through various ways
due to previous enmity relating to land dispute with
the accused Nos. 1 and 4. They also threatened to
kidnap his son namely Md. Abdullah-Al-Noor, a 4
(four) years old boy, from the mobile/cell-phone nos.
01863759734, 01755456569 and 01745680754.  He
informed the matter to Pabna RAB office. However, he
did not mention whether it was written or verbal and
it is also not clear whether the RAB conducted any
investigation with this regard. P.W.18 Sub-Inspector,
S.M. Moinuddin deposed that he collected the call list
of the 3 (three) SIM numbers mentioned in the ejahar

but these SIMs could not be identified as the user
names were illegible. P.W. No. 1 Md. Abul Hossain is
the Informant and father of the victim deposed that he
lodged the First Information Report (FIR) to the
Chatmohar Police Station and he suspected that the
accused persons namely Md. Abdus Samad, Kabir
Hossain, Alep Ali Molla, Most. Ayesha Bewa and
Jakirul Islam had committed the offence, due to land
dispute with accused Abdus Samad and Ayesha
Bewa. The Informant entangled the appellant Md.
Abdus Samad in this case on the basis of mere
suspicion. P.W.2, Most. Atiara Parveen, the Mother of
the Deceased, Abdullah-Al-Noor and wife of the
Informant Md. Abul Hossain suspected that the
accused persons namely Ayesha Bewa, Samad
Biswas, Kabir Biswas, Sohel Biswas, and Aziza Akhtar
Rupa conspired to kidnap her son, they demanded
ransom, and then killed him. P.W.9 Md. Amir Hossain
deposed that the accused person namely Sohel, his
wife Rupa, Samad, Kabir and Ayesha in connivance
with each other were kidnapped and killed the victim

Abdullah-Al-Noor. P.W.4 Sukumar Gomez deposed
that he heard from the Informant that Sohel, Rupa,
Samad, Kabir were involved with this incident. P.W. 5
Md. Rezaul Karim deposed that as he asked the
Informant, who could have committed such an act. In
reply, he was crying and said that “My own relatives
have done this.” The Informant mentioned the names
Samad, Sohel, and Kabir. He could not recall whether
he mentioned any other name. P.W.6 Md. Jahangir
Alam deposed that he heard Noor's father telling
everyone that his tenants Sohail and Rupa, Samad,
Kabir, Ayesha are involved with this incident of
murder. P.W.7 Md. Amir Hossain Minu deposed that
as he asked Abul what the reason was for kidnapping
his child. In reply, Abul said that his stepmother
Ayesha, Samad and Kabir had been provoking him in
various ways for taking their family land. Abul
suspected that they are the ones who took away his
child. P.W.8 Md. Lutfar Sarkar deposed that he heard
from Abul Hossain, his infant son was killed by his
tenant Sohel and his wife Rupa. Later, Abul Hossain

again told him that Samad, Kabir and his stepmother
Ayesha had committed the murder. The evidence of
the Prosecution Witness Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 are
hearsay evidence, though the oral evidence must, in
all cases whatever, be direct, according to the
provision of Section 60 of the Evidence Act, 1872. The
Informant Md. Abul Hossain has implicated the
appellant Md. Abdus Samad in the case on the basis
of mere suspicion out of previous enmity, due to land
dispute. It is the settled principle of criminal law that
suspicion, however strong it might be, cannot be a
basis for conviction. We find support of this
contention in the case of Abu Taher Chowdhury and
others Vs. The State, 11 BLD (AD) 2, 202). Further,
none of the prosecution witnesses deposed that
appellant Md. Abdus Samad was involved in any way
with the incident of kidnapping and murder of the
victim, which attract the provision of section 7 of the
Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000.
However, the accused Md. Sohel Biswash made a
confessional statement under Section 164 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure on 01.07.2014 wherein he
implicated the accused Abdus Samad as one of the
planner or conspirator for kidnapping the victim. Let
us now consider the confessional statement of the
condemned-prisoner made under section 164 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, wherein he categorically
stated that:-
"--------Abygvb gvm †`‡oK Av‡M Avwg kvwjLv ¯‹z‡ji cv‡k bZzb evRv‡ii
w`‡K hvw”Qjvg| mKvj Abygvb 10.30 Uvi w`‡K evRvi mg‡q| ZLb mvgv`
fvB‡qi mv‡_ †`Lv nq| Qvgv` fvB Aveyj †nv‡m‡bi fwMœcwZ| Avgv‡K
wRÁvmv K‡i Aveyj †nv‡mb m¤ú‡K©| Avwg Zvi m¤ú‡K© fvjB ewj| wZwb
Avgv‡K e‡j Avgvi m‡½ Zvi K_v Av‡Q| Gi 4/5 w`b c‡i evRv‡i Qvgv`
fvB‡qi mv‡_ Avevi †`Lv nq| †m Avgv‡K 1Uv Mwji g‡a¨ wb‡q hvq|----"
".........Zvi †ek wKQzw`b Zvi mv‡_ †hvMv‡hvM nqwb Avgvi| Gici GKw`b
Avwg kvwjLv evRv‡i iwd‡Ki †`vKv‡b e‡mwQjvg| gyw`Lvbvi †`vKvb| mÜ¨vi
ci| Qvgv` fvB Avgv‡K †W‡K kvwjLv ¯‹z‡ji gv‡V wb‡q hvq|...."
"-----c‡ii w`b mÜ¨vi mgq Avwg Qvgv` fvB‡qi evmvi mvg‡b wM‡q `vovB|
†m †ei n‡q Avm‡j Avwg Zv‡K Avwg ivwR g‡g© ewj| Avgvi ¯¿xi ¯‹z‡ji
†cQ‡b Qvgv` fvB‡qi evmv| †m †fZi †_‡K GKUv †KviAvb kixd wb‡q
Av‡m| †m Avgv‡K Zv‡Z nvZ †`IqvB‡q KvD‡K bv ejvi K_v e‡j| ........

Qvgv` fvB e‡j Aveyj †nv‡mb Gi KvQ †_‡K UvKv wb‡q Zvi UvKv w`‡qB
gvgjv Pvjv‡e|----"
"------K_vgZ 25/6/14 Bs Zvwi‡L †jvKUv mKvj 10.45 Uvi w`‡K Avgvi
fvov evmvq Av‡m| Zvi eqm Abygvb 28/29 eQi n‡e| †m Avgv‡K e‡j †m
Qvgv` fvB‡qi †jvK| Avwg wRÁvmv Ki‡j Zvi bvg wjUb e‡j| Zv‡K Avgvi
iæ‡g XzKvB|-----"
On
contrary,
written
submitted by the accused Sohel Biswash during
examination under Section 342 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898, wherein he categorically
stated that:-
"-------- Avwg Avgvi ¯¿x I p¿¹¡epq AÎ gvgjvi Awf‡hvMKvix| ev`x Aveyj
†nv‡m‡bi evoxi wbP Zjvi 3wU iæ‡gi g‡a¨ 2wU iæg fvov jBqv ¯¿xmn
emevm KwiZvg Aci l¦‡g GbwRI fvov †bq Ges K‡qKwU †Q‡j _vKZ|
Avgiv Kgb fvovwUqv wn‡m‡e GKB m‡½ Ae¯’vb KwiZvg| Avwg Uªv‡fj
e¨emvi LvwZ‡i cÖ‡Z¨n evoxi evwn‡i _vwK| Kv‡RB Avgvi evoxi gvwj‡Ki
AvZ¥xq ¯^Rb m¤ú‡K© Avgvi †Kv‡bv avibv bvB Ges cwiPq wQj bv Ges
_vwKevi †Kvb Kvib bvB|-------"
There are two different statements made by the
same person i.e. accused Sohel Biswash which
contradict with each other relating to the alleged

meeting or having a conversation with Abdus Samad
appears to be untrue because he did not know any
relatives of Abul Hossain (the Informant).
Now the question is as to whether Rafique was
present at the grocery shop or whether any other
persons were present at that time, if so, whether they
witnessed accused Sohel Biswash and accused Abdus
Samad were together. But the prosecution failed to
produce Rafique or any other witness to establish that
he had seen Abdus Samad and Sohel were talking to
each other.
The accused Sohel in his confessional statement
mentioned the name of one Liton as his accomplice.
P.W.19 Sub-Inspector Asif Mohammad Siddiqul Islam
is the 2nd Investigating Officer deposed that "Av‡jvP¨
gvgjvi c~e©eZ©x Z`šÍKvix Kg©KZ©v AÎ gvgjvi NUbvi mwnZ cÖZ¨¶fv‡e RwoZ
Avmvgx †gvt †mv‡nj wek¦vm‡K †MÖdZvi c~e©K Zvnvi †`vl ¯^xKv‡ivw³ g~jK Revbew›`
†dŠt Kvt wet AvB‡bi 164 aviv †gvZv‡eK wjwce‡Üi e¨e¯’v weÁ Av`vj‡Zi gva¨‡g
K‡ib| D³ Avmvgx AÎ gvgjvi NUbvi mwnZ RwoZ g‡g© †`vl ¯^xKvi Ki‡jI
wb‡R‡K AÎ gvgjvi `vq nB‡Z evPvi Rb¨ wjUb bv‡g GKwU KvíwbK PwiÎ m„wó
Kwiqv gvgjvi `vqfvi D³ Pwi‡Îi Dci Ac©b K‡i| wKš‘, D³ bv‡gi †Kvb e¨w³i

mÜvb ev †Kvb cÖKvi Z_¨ c~e©eZ©x Z`šÍKvix Kg©KZ©v msMÖn Kwi‡Z cv‡ib bvB| .....
gvgjvwUi mvwe©K Z`šÍKv‡j Rvbv hvq, AÎ gvgjvi g~j Avmvgx †gvt †mv‡nj wek¦vm
wb‡R‡K AÎ gvgjvi nZ¨vi `vq nB‡Z euvPvi Rb¨ wb‡RB wjUb bv‡gi GKwU KvíwbK
PwiÎ ˆZix Kwiqv weÁ Av`vj‡Z †`vl ¯^xKv‡ivw³g~jK Revbe›`x cÖ`vb K‡ib|"
The Investigating Officer conducted extensive
investigation with regard to the accused Liton. But he
failed to find any information or proof about the
existence of Liton. The accused Sohel mentioned an
imaginary and fictional character of Liton in his
confessional statement before the court only to save
himself. If the Investigating Officer failed to produce
any evidence about Liton or his existence then the
allegation against accused Abdus Samad does not
have any lags to stand. There is no credible evidence
on record to establish that the appellant Abdus
Samad had any common intention or participation in
the commission of the alleged offence of kidnapping or
murder in the instant case, nor is there any evidence
to show his direct involvement, instigation, or active
role in this incident of kidnapping or murder. It is
settled principle of law that in a criminal case, the

prosecution alone has to prove the case beyond any
reasonable doubt and no onus lies upon the defense.
The prosecution witnesses did not see the alleged
incident and there is no circumstantial evidence to
prove the prosecution’s case beyond reasonable
doubt, it is case of no evidence, so far it’s relate to the
accused Samad. Confessional statement and chain of
circumstantial
evidence,
prosecution witnesses and other materials produced
by the prosecution completely failed to prove the
involvement of the appellant Abdus Samad with the
alleged occurrence. There is no evidence or any
ingredient of the offence against the appellant Abdus
Samad as contemplated under section 7 of the Nari-OShishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000. Therefore, we are
of the view that the learned Judge of the Trial Court
failed to appreciate the evidence and materials on
record in its true perspective and came to an
erroneous finding in convicting and sentencing the
appellant Abdus Samad. Thus, we are of the view that
the prosecution has not been able to connect the

appellant in commission of the offence punishable
under the said Act. Accordingly, we find merit in this
appeal.
Let us now consider whether or not the
prosecution has been able to prove the allegation of
kidnapping and /or murder against the accused
respondents
namely
(1)
Kabir
Hossain,
(2)
that they were involved with this incident of
kidnapping and murder.
Mr. Rafiqul Islam learned Advocate argued that
the accused respondents namely (1) Kabir Hossain, (2)
were involved with this occurrence. The informantappellant having been succeeded in proving the
charge leveled against them beyond all reasonable
doubt but the learned Judge of the Druto Bichar
Tribunal most illegally and erroneously acquitted the
accused respondents, which is not a proper judgment
in the eye of law.

On the contrary, learned Advocate Mr. Hossain
argued that this is a case of no evidence; the
acquitted-respondents are innocent and they have
been falsely implicated in the case at the instance of a
vested quarter. The learned Judge of the Trial Court
after considering and appreciating the evidence and
materials on record in its true perspective acquitted
respondents from the charge level against them.

In the Instant case, we find that the Informantappellant preferred this Criminal Appeal challenging
the order of acquittal of the accused respondents
namely (1) Kabir Hossain, (2) Mossammat Aysha Bewa
and (3) Aziza Akhtar Rupa. The acquitted-respondents
were F.I.R. named accused persons and they were
suspected by the informant and no credible witness
found against them. Accused Md. Sohel Biswash in
his confessional statement did not implicate the
acquitted respondents with the alleged incident of
kidnapping and murder of the victim.
In the instant case, we find that the prosecution
witnesses Nos. 1 and 2 have implicated the accused

respondents in the case on the basis of mere
suspicion arising out of previous enmity due to land
dispute. The prosecution witnesses did not see the
alleged incident and there is no circumstantial
evidence to prove the prosecution case all beyond
reasonable doubt. There is no credible evidence on
record to establish that the accused respondents have
had any common intention or participation in
commissioning the alleged offence of kidnapping or
murder in the instant case, nor is there any evidence
to show their direct involvement, instigation, or active
role in this incident of kidnapping or murder. This is a
case of no evidence, so far its relate to these
respondents. The acquitted-respondents are innocent
and they have been falsely implicated in the case at
the instance of a vested quarter. There is no eye
witness, the prosecution witnesses did not see the
alleged incident and there is no circumstantial
evidence to prove the prosecution case all beyond
reasonable doubt, it is case of no evidence and as
such, the learned Judge of the Tribunal after

considering and appreciating the evidence and
materials on record in its true perspective acquitted
respondents
namely
(1)
Kabir
Hossain,
(2)
from the charge leveled against them. There is no
illegality and irregularity in the impugned judgment
and order of acquittal of the respondents passed the
learned Judge of the trial Court below. In the light of
above findings and observation stated above, we do
not find merit in this appeal.
Accordingly, the Death Reference No. 75 of
2018 is rejected and both the Criminal Appeal
No.7561 of 2018 and Jail Appeal No.212 of 2018
are hereby dismissed. The condemned- prisoner Md.
Sohel Biswash is convicted under Section 302 of the
Penal Code and commuted his death penalty to life
imprisonment with fine of Taka 10,000/- instead of
Taka 20,000/- only and also convicting him under
section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain,
2000 and sentencing him rigorous imprisonment for
life with fine of Taka 10,000/- instead of Taka

20,000/-
only
default
suffer
rigorous
imprisonment for 06 (six) months more instead of 01
(one)
year
both
sentence
will
run
concurrently.
The
Convict-Appellant
Md.
Sohel
Biswash is entitled to get the benefit as provided
under Sub-Section (1) of Section 35A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure.
The Criminal Appeal No.7065 of 2018 is
hereby  allowed and impugned judgment and order of
conviction and sentence dated 28.06.2018 passed by
the learned Judge of the Druto Bichar Tribunal,
Rajshahi in Druto Bichar Tribunal Case No.05 of 2017
arising out of Chatmohor Police Station Case No.23
dated 25.06.2014 corresponding to G.R. No.123 of
2014 convicting the Convict-Appellant Md. Abdus
Samad under section 7 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan
Daman Ain, 2000 and sentencing him rigorous
imprisonment for life with fine of Taka 20,000/- only,
in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 01(one)
year more is hereby set aside. The appellant is

acquitted from the charge leveled against him and he
may be released from his bail bond.
The Criminal Appeal No.8266 of 2018 is
hereby dismissed and the impugned judgment and
order of acquittal dated 28.06.2018, so far it relates to
the accused-respondent Nos. (1) Kabir Hossain, (2)
passed in Druto Bichar Tribunal Case No.05 of 2017
passed by the learned Judge of the Druto Bichar
Tribunal, Rajshahi in Druto Bichar Tribunal Case
No.05 of 2017 is hereby affirmed. The accusedrespondent Nos. (1) Kabir Hossain, (2) Mossammat
Aysha Bewa and (3) Aziza Akhtar Rupa may be
released from their respective bail bond, if any.
Send down the Lower Court records along with a
copy of this judgment and order to the Court
concerned at once, for information and necessary
action.

Md. Jabid Hossain, J:

I agree.